# Carleson’s Theorem

686

of order 0 or 1 at 1, but a proof of the general casestill appears to be a long way off. It is one of the problems for which the Clay Mathematics Institute offers aprize of a million dollars. For a further discussion of the problem and much more about its mathematical context, see arithmetic geometry [IV.5](/part-04/arithmetic-geometry). V.5 Carleson’s Theorem

Charles Fefferman

Carleson’s theorem asserts that the[III.27](/part-03/the-fourier-transform) of a functionf in L2[0,2π] converges almost fourier series every where. To understand this statement and appre-ciate its significance, let us follow the history of the subject, starting in the early nineteenth century.[VI.25](/part-06/jean-baptiste-joseph-fourier-17681830) great idea was that “any” (complex-valued) func-fourier’s tionf on an interval such as [0,2π] can be expanded in what we would now call a$\infty\text{Fourierseries}$, f (θ) =n=−$\infty$ an(ei)nθ, (1)

for suitable the formula for the coefficients Fourier coefficients an a, and proved that (1)n. Fourier obtained holds in interesting special cases. The next major advance, due to dirichlet [VI.36], was a formula for theis defined to be Nth partial sum SN f (θ), which SN f (θ) =n=−N N an(ei)nθ. (2) Dirichlet realized that the precise meaning of (1) is that Dirichlet used his formula for certain circumstances (3) does indeed hold. For exam - N . im→. nfty SN f (θ) =SNf (θ).f to prove that under(3) ple, ifthen it holds for everyf is a continuous increasing function onθ \in  (0, 2π).
[0,2π], Decades later, de la vallée poussin [VI.67](/part-06/charles-jean-de-la-valle-poussin-18661962) discovered an example of a continuous function whose Fourier series diverges at a single point. More generally, given any countable set$E ⊂ [0$,2π], there exists a continuous function every point of E, a result that appears to restrict quitef whose Fourier series diverges at considerably the circumstances under which Fourier’soriginal vision is valid. progress in Fourier analysis and a significant changeof viewpoint.
We first sketch Lebesgue’s ideas and then The work of lebesgue [VI.72](/part-06/henri-lebesgue-18751941) led to fundamental trace their impact on Fourier analysis. Lebesgue sought to define a notion of integration that could be applied to all but the most pathological

V. Theorems and Problems

nonnegative functions ing the measure [III.55](/part-03/measures) of a set F on [0, 2π]E. He began by defin-⊂ [0,2π]. Loosely speaking, the measure ofset Ewould weigh” if the interval E, written[0,μ(E)2π], is “what thewere made of wire weighing one gram per centimeter. For instance, the measure of an interval(a, b) is equal to its lengthb - a. Certain sets E have measure zero, e.g., countable sets, or theare regarded as negligibly small.cantor set [III.17](/part-03/dimension);
sets of measure zero Lebesgue integral functions Using his notion of measure, Lebesgue defined the F ⩾ 0 o(n0)2[π0 F(θ), 2π]d. All but the most patho-θfor the “measurable” logical functions are measurable, butbe infinite if F is too big. For example, i(f0)2 F(θ)π F(θ)=d1θ/θmayforθ \in  (0, 2π], then the integral of Fis infinite. spacef Finally, given any real numberon [L0 p,[20π], 2π]that are not too big, in the sense that consists of all measurable functionsp ⩾ 1, the Lebesgue for a slight, technical correction to this definition.)02π |f (θ)|p dθis finite.
(See function spaces [III.29](/part-03/function-spaces) Fourier analysis. The Lebesgue spaceis also a We now turn to the impact of Lebesgue’s theory onhilbert space [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis), plays a fundamen - L2[0, 2π], which tal role. Iff belongs to L2[0,2π], then its Fourier coefficients an are such that. nfty|an|2 < . nfty . (4) Conversely, any sequence of complex numbers n=−. nfty a (Fourier coefficients of a function−$\infty$ < n < . nfty ) satisfying (4) arises as the sequence off in L2[0,2π].
More-n over, the size of a functionan are related by the Plancherel formula fand its Fourier coefficients: 2$π \infty$ 2$π0 |f (θ)|2 dθ =n=−$. nfty$|an|2$. function Finally, the partial sumsf in the L2-norm. In other words, SNf (see (2)) converge to the2π|SN f (θ) - f (θ)|2 dθ −→ 0 (5)

aswhich the function Ntends to infinity. This gives us a precise sense in0 f is the sum of its Fourier series. Thus, we have justified Fourier’s formula (1) by rein-terpreting it as the statement (5) rather than using the more obvious interpretation of (3).However, it would still be nice to know to what extent the original, more straightforward interpretation canbe justified. In 1906, Luzin conjectured that iff is any function in L2[0$, π], then N \lim→$. nfty SN f (θ) = f (θ) (6)