# Dirichlet’s Theorem

$V$ . $9$ .

Ergodic Theorems

proof. It also meant that the chances were rather high that there were errors along the way. Fortunately, in the years since the announcement of the result, various teams of group theorists have been publishing summaries and revisions of many parts of the proof, and a series of volumes containing the whole proof is now well on the way to completion.

$V$ . $8$

Dirichlet’s Theorem

A famous theorem of euclid [VI.2](/part-06/euclid-ca) asserts that there are infinitely many primes. But what if one wants more information about these primes? For instance, are there infinitely many primes of the form $4n - 1$ ? A fairly straightforward modification of Euclid’s argument shows that there are, and a slightly more difficult modification proves that there are infinitely many of the form $4n + 1$ as well. However, modifications of Euclid’s argument are not enough to prove the general result in this direction, which is that if $a$ and $m$ are coprime (that is, have highest common factor $1$ ), then there are infinitely many primes of the form mn  +  a. This was proved by dirichlet [VI.36] using what are now called Dirichlet L-functions [III.47](/part-03/l-functions), which are closely related to the riemann zeta function [IV.2](/part-04/number-theory). The condition that $m$ and $a$ have highest common factor $1$ is clearly necessary, since any common factor of $m$ and $a$ will be a factor of mn  +  a. Dirichlet’s theorem is discussed further in analytic number theory [IV.2](/part-04/number-theory). $V$ . $9$ Ergodic Theorems Vitaly Bergelson Consider the sequence (z n) $\i\text{nf ty}n = {}^{0}$ , where $z$ is a complex number of modulus $1$ . While for $z \neq 1$ our sequence is not convergent, it is not hard to see that, on average, it exhibits quite regular behavior. Indeed, using the formula for the sum of a geometric progression, and assuming that $z \neq 1$ , we have, for any $N > M \ge 0$ , M $z + {}^{zM} + {}^{1} +$ · · · $+ {}^{zN} - {}^{1}N - MM N - M + 1 - {}^{1})$ z ($z_{2} = (N - M)(z - 1)\le (N - M)|z - 1|$ , which implies that when N - M is large enough, the averages $z^{M} + z^{M} + {}^{1} +$ · · · $+ z^{N} - {}^{1}$ A N, M $(z) =N - M689$ are small. More formally, we have ⎧ ⎨ $0$ , $z \neq 1$ , $z^{M} + z^{M} + {}^{1} +$ · · · $+ z^{N} - {}^{1}$ = lim (1) ⎩ $1$ , $N - Mz = 1$ . $N - M \to \i\text{nf ty}$ This simple fact is a special, one-dimensional case of von Neumann’s ergodic theorem, which was the first mathematical statement to throw light on the so-called quasi-ergodic hypothesis in statistical mechanics and the kinetic theory of gases. Von Neumann’s theorem concerns the average behavior of powers of unitary operators [III.50](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties) on hilbert spaces [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis). If U is such an operator defined on a Hilbert space H , then we can associate with U the U-invariant subspace H inv that consists of all vectors f $\in$ H such that $Uf = f$ : that is, all vectors that are fixed by U. Let P be the orthogonal projection [III.50](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties) onto that subspace. Then von Neumann’s theorem asserts that, for every f $\in$ H , $N - 11$ lim $= {}^{0}$ . n - U f P f  N - M \to \i\text{nf ty} N - Mn = M In other words, in a certain sense the averages $N - 11$ U n $N - Mn = M$ converge to the orthogonal projection P . (This is not actually the theorem as formulated by von neumann [VI.91](/part-06/john-von-neumann-19031957), but it is simpler to explain. He proved an equivalent statement about a continuous family of unitary operators (U τ) τ $\in$ R .) Before we discuss various applications and refinements of von Neumann’s theorem, let us briefly comment on its proof. Von Neumann’s original proof used sophisticated machinery such as the spectral theory of one-parameter groups of unitary operators, obtained by Marshall Stone. Over the years many alternative proofs were offered, the simplest being a “geometric” proof due to riesz [VI.74](/part-06/frigyes-frdric-riesz-18801956), which we will describe below. To give the rough idea of von Neumann’s proof it is convenient to use the fact (which follows from the spectral theorem [III.50](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties) ) that any unitary operator U on a Hilbert space H has a “functional model.” That is, we can realize the Hilbert space H as a function space, consisting of all (equivalence classes of) square-integrable functions with respect to some finite measure [III.55](/part-03/measures), in such a way that U becomes a multiplication operator M φ (f)  =  φf , where φ is a complexvalued measurable function that satisfies $|φ(x)| = 1$ for almost every x. It is not hard to see, after passing to such a functional model, that von Neumann’s
