# Dirichlet’s Theorem

V.9. Ergodic Theorems

proof. It also meant that the chances were rather high that there were errors along the way. Fortunately, in the years since the announcement of the result, various teams of group theorists have been publishing summaries and revisions of many parts of the proof, anda series of volumes containing the whole proof is now well on the way to completion. V.8 Dirichlet’s Theorem A famous theorem of euclid [VI.2](/part-06/euclid-ca) asserts that there are infinitely many primes. But what if one wants more information about these primes?
For instance, are there infinitely many primes of the form 4 n -1?
A fairly straightforward modification of Euclid’s argu-ment shows that there are, and a slightly more difficult modification proves that there are infinitely manyof the form 4$n +$1 as well. However, modifications of Euclid’s argument are not enough to prove the general result in this direction, which is that if coprime (that is, have highest common factor 1), thena and m are there are infinitely many primes of the formmn +aare now called Dirichlet.
This was proved by dirichlet L-functions[VI.36] using what[III.47](/part-03/l-functions), which are closely related to the[IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory). The condition th atm riemann zeta function and a have highest com- mon factor 1 is clearly necessary, since any common factor ofm and a will be a factor of mn + a. Dirich- let’s theorem is discussed further in analytic number theory [IV.2 §4](/part-04/number-theory). V.9 Ergodic Theorems Vitaly Bergelson Consider the sequence number of modulus 1.
While for(zn). nftyn = 0, wherez . eq 1 our sequencez is a complex is not convergent, it is not hard to see that, on aver - age, it exhibits quite regular behavior. Indeed, using the formula for the sum of a geometric progression, and assuming thatz . eq 1, we have, for any N > M ⩾ 0, z M + (z M)+1 + · · · + (z N)-1 N - Mz M ((z N()-M)+1 - 1) 2= (N - M)(z - 1) ⩽ (N - M)|z - 1|, which implies that when N - M is large enough, the averages z M + (z M)+1 + · · · + (z N)-1 AN, M(z) = N - M 689 are small.
More formally, we have N- . im M→. nfty z M + z M+N1 + · · · +- M z N-1 = ⎧⎨⎩01, z, z . eq = 11,. (1) This simple fact is a special, one-dimensional case of von Neumann’s ergodic theorem mathematical statement to throw light on the so - called, which was the first quasi-ergodic hypothesis in statistical mechanics andthe kinetic theory of gases. ior of powers of hilbert spaces Von Neumann’s theorem concerns the average behav-[III.37](/part - 03/bayesian - analysis).
If unitary operators$U$is such an operator defined[III.50 §3.1](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties) on on a Hilbert space H, then we can associate with U thetors Uf-invariant subspace∈ H such that Uf H=invf: that is, all vectors that that consists of all vecare fixed by U. Let P be the orthogonal projection [III.50 §3.5](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties) onto that subspace. Then von Neumann’stheorem asserts that, for every$f \in H$, N - 1 N- . im M→$\infty$ N - 1 Mn = M Unf - P f = 0.

In other words, in a certain sense the averages

$N^{-1}U^{n}N - M$

converge to the orthogonal projection$n = M P$. (This is not actually the theorem as formulated by[VI.91](/part-06/john-von-neumann-19031957), but it is simpler to explain. He proved an equiv-von neumann alent statement about a continuous family of unitary operators$(U ) \in^{R}$.) ments of von Neumann’s theorem, let us briefly com-Before we discuss various applications and refine-$τ^{τ}$ ment on its proof. Von Neumann’s original proof used sophisticated machinery such as the spectral theory of one-parameter groups of unitary operators, obtainedby Marshall Stone.
Over the years many alternative proofs were offered, the simplest being a “geometric”proof due to riesz [VI.74](/part-06/frigyes-frdric-riesz-18801956), which we will describe below. To give the rough idea of von Neumann’s proof it is convenient to use the fact (which follows from the spectral theoremator U on a Hilbert space[III.50 §3.4](/part - 03/linear - operators - and - their - properties)) that any unitary oper-$H$has a “functional model.” That is, we can realize the Hilbert space H as a func- tion space, consisting of all (equivalence classes of) square-integrable functions with
respect to some finite measure [III.55](/part - 03/measures), in such a way that U becomes a multi- plication operator valued measurable function that satisfies$M^{φ}(f ) = φf$, where φ is a complex-|φ(x)| = 1 for almost every ing to such a functional model, that von Neumann’sx. It is not hard to see, after pass-