# Gödel’s Theorem

700

to find the prime factorization ofwithp, gives it to us for n. In practice, what this meansm, and this, together is that we generate a sequence of numbers, where each number in the sequence is the previous one divided by its smallest prime factor. For example, if we start withthe number 168, then the sequence begins 168, 84, 42,

21. At this point we cannot divide by 2, but 3 is a factorof 21 so the next number in the sequence is 7. Since 7 is a prime, the process stops. Looking back, we find thatwe have shown that 168$= 2 \times 2 \times 2 \times 3 \times 7$. inconceivable that a number could have two genuinely different prime factorizations. But the method does not Once one is used to this method, it comes to seem guarantee this at all. Suppose we successively divideby the largest prime factor rather than the smallest. Why should this not give a completely different set of primes? It is hard to think of an argument that doesnot use a phrase such as “the prime factorization of$n$,” thereby implicitly assuming what it sets out to prove.It is possible to show in a rather precise way that the fundamental theorem of arithmetic isby looking at an algebraic structure where the notionnot obvious, of prime factorization makes sense but numbers can have more than one prime factorization. This structure, denoted Z$(\sqrt{-5})$, is the set of all numbers of the formacan be added and multiplied just like ordinary integers$.+ b\sqrt{-5}$, where a and b are integers. Such numbers For example, $(1 + 3 \sqrt{-5}) + (6 - 7 \sqrt{-5}) = 7 - 4 \sqrt{-5}$ and (1 + 3\sqrt{-5})(6 -\sqrt{7}\sqrt{-5}) \sqrt \sqrt= 6 - 7 \sqrt{-5} + 18 -5 - 21( -5)2= 6 + 11 -\sqrt{5} + 21 \times  5= 111 + 11 -5.bwould also be a natural definition if we wanted to\sqrt{In} this structure, we can regard a number-5 as prime if its only factors are ±1 and ±xx=. (Thisa + extend the notion of primes from the positive integersto all integers.) It can be shown quite easily that 2 and 3 are both primes (though it is not immediately obvious since there are now more possibilities for factors). \text{Two other primes are} 1 \text{either as} 2 \times 3 \text{or as}+\sqrt(-1 5 and 1+ \sqrt{-5})(-\sqrt{1} --5. \text{But we can write} 6\sqrt{-5})$, so 6 \text{has two}$\text{different prime} \text{factorizations}. \text{For a further discussion of this point see algebraic numbers} [[IV.1 §§4–8]](/part - 04/algebraic - numbers). damental theorem of arithmetic must use some featureof What this example shows is that any proof of the fun-Z, the set of integers, that is lacking in Z(\sqrt{-5}). Since

V. Theorems and Problems

addition and multiplication work in a very similar wayin both structures, it is not very easy to find such a feature, or at least not one that is relevant. It turns outthat the important property that Z(\sqrt{-5}) \text{does not have} is an appropriate analogue of the following basic principle for integers: that ifone can writen = qm + r mwith 0 and n⩽ r <are integers, then|m|. This fact underlies important role in the most commonly given proof ofeuclid’s algorithm [III.22], which plays an unique factorization. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus See some fundamental mathematical definitions [I.3 §5.5](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) Gauss’s Law of Quadratic Reciprocity See from quadratic reciprocity to class field theory [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871) V.15 Gödel’s Theorem Peter J. Cameron In response to problems in the foundations of mathematics such asall sets which are not members of themselves; is it a Russell’s paradox (“consider the set of member of itself?”), hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) proposed that the consistency of any given part of mathematics shouldbe established by finitary methods that could not lead to a contradiction. Any part for which this had been done could then be used as a secure foundation for allof mathematics. metic of the natural numbers, which can be described interms of An example of a “part of mathematics” is the arith-first-order logic [IV.23 §1](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory). We begin with symbols, both logical (connectives such as “not” and“implies,” quantifiers such as “for all,” the equality symbol, symbols for variables, and punctuation) and nonlogical (symbols for constants, relations, and functions suitable for the branch of mathematics under consider at i on). Formulas are finite strings of symbols built according to certain precise rules (which allow themto be mechanically recognized). We fix a certain set of formulas as ourrules of inference that allow us to infer some formulas axioms, and we also choose a few from others. An example of a rule of inference isponens: if we have inferredφ and (φ \to ψ), then we canmodus inferψ. A theorem is a formula that is at the end of a chain (or tree) of inferences that starts with axioms.
