# Gödel’s Theorem

$700$

to find the prime factorization of m, and this, together with p, gives it to us for n. In practice, what this means is that we generate a sequence of numbers, where each number in the sequence is the previous one divided by its smallest prime factor. For example, if we start with the number $168$ , then the sequence begins $168$ , $84$ , $42$ , $21$ . At this point we cannot divide by $2$ , but $3$ is $a$ factor of $21$ so the next number in the sequence is $7$ . Since $7$ is a prime, the process stops.
Looking back, we find that we have shown that $168 = 2 \times 2 \times 2 \times 3 \times 7$ . Once one is used to this method, it comes to seem inconceivable that a number could have two genuinely different prime factorizations. But the method does not guarantee this at all. Suppose we successively divide by the largest prime factor rather than the smallest. Why should this not give a completely different set of primes? It is hard to think of an argument that does not use a phrase such as “the prime factorization of n,” thereby implicitly assuming what it sets out to prove.
It is possible to show in a rather precise way that the fundamental theorem of arithmetic is not obvious, by looking at an algebraic structure where the notion of prime factorization makes sense but numbers can have more than one prime factorization. This structure, √ denoted Z ( $- 5$ ), is the set of all numbers of the form √ $a + b - 5$ , where $a$ and $b$ are integers. Such numbers can be added and multiplied just like ordinary integers. For example, √$({}^{1} + {}^{3} - 5) + ({}^{6} - {}^{7} - 5) = {}^{7} - {}^{4} - 5$ and √$({}^{1} + {}^{3} - 5)(6 - {}^{7} - 5)$

√= {}6 - {}7 - 5 + {}18 - 5 - {}21( - 5)2 √

$= {}^{6} + {}^{11} - 5 + {}^{21} \times {}^{5}$ √ $= {}^{111} + {}^{11} - 5$ . In this structure, we can regard a number $x = a +$ √ $b - 5$ as prime if its only factors are ± $1$ and ±x. (This would also be a natural definition if we wanted to extend the notion of primes from the positive integers to all integers .) It can be shown quite easily that $2$ and $3$ are both primes (though it is not immediately obvious since there are now more possibilities for factors). Two √other primes are $1 + - 5$ and $1 - - 5$ .
But we can write $6$ √either as $2 \times 3$ or as $(1 + - 5)(1 - - 5)$ , so $6$ has two different prime factorizations. For a further discussion of this point see algebraic numbers [IV . 1 § § 4 - 8 ] . What this example shows is that any proof of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic must use some feature √ of Z , the set of integers, that is lacking in Z ( $- 5$ ). Since V. Theorems and Problems addition and multiplication work in a very similar way in both structures, it is not very easy to find such a feature, or at least not one that is relevant.
It turns out √ that the important property that $Z( - 5)$ does not have is an appropriate analogue of the following basic principle for integers: that if $m$ and $n$ are integers, then one can write $n = qm + r$ with $0 \le r < |m|$ . This fact underlies euclid’s algorithm [III.22] , which plays an important role in the most commonly given proof of unique factorization.
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus See some fundamental mathematical definitions [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) Gauss’s Law of Quadratic Reciprocity See from quadratic reciprocity to class field theory [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871) $V$ . $15$ Gödel’s Theorem Peter J. Cameron In response to problems in the foundations of mathematics such as Russell’s paradox (“ consider the set of all sets which are not members of themselves; is it a member of itself ?
”), hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) proposed that the consistency of any given part of mathematics should be established by finitary methods that could not lead to a contradiction. Any part for which this had been done could then be used as a secure foundation for all of mathematics. An example of a “part of mathematics” is the arithmetic of the natural numbers, which can be described in terms of first-order logic [IV.23](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory) .
We begin with symbols, both logical (connectives such as “not” and “implies,” quantifiers such as “for all,” the equality symbol, symbols for variables, and punctuation) and nonlogical (symbols for constants, relations, and functions suitable for the branch of mathematics under consideration) . Formulas are finite strings of symbols built according to certain precise rules (which allow them to be mechanically recognized). We fix a certain set of formulas as our axioms, and we also choose a few rules of inference that allow us to infer some formulas from others.
An example of a rule of inference is modus ponens: if we have inferred φ and (φ $\to \psi$ ), then we can infer $\psi.$ A theorem is a formula that is at the end of a chain (or tree) of inferences that starts with axioms.

$V$ . $15$ .

Gödel’s Theorem

Axioms for the natural numbers were given by peano [VI.62](/part-06/giuseppe-peano-18581932) (see the peano axioms [III.67](/part-03/the-peano-axioms)). The nonlogical symbols are zero, the “successor function” s, addition, and multiplication. (The last two can be defined in terms of the others by inductive axioms: for example, the rules $x + 0 = x$ and $x + s(y) = s(x + y)$ define addition .) The crucial axiom is the principle of induction, which asserts that if P (n) is a formula such that P ( $0$ ) is true and P (n) implies P (s (n)) for all n, then P (n) is true for all n.
Hilbert’s specific challenge was to give a formal proof of the consistency of this theory: that is, a proof that no contradiction can be deduced from the axioms by the rules of first-order logic. Hilbert’s program was undone by two remarkable incompleteness theorems proved by gödel [VI.92](/part-06/kurt-gdel-19061978). The first theorem states the following. There are (firstorder) statements about the natural numbers that can be neither proved nor disproved from Peano’s axioms. (This is sometimes qualified by being prefixed with, “If Peano’s axioms are consistent, then . . .
.” However, since we accept the existence of the natural numbers, we do know that Peano’s axioms are consistent, as the natural numbers model them. So the qualification is unnecessary here, although it would need to be included if we were discussing some axioms whose consistency was not clear .) Gödel’s proof is long, but it is based on two simple ideas. The first is Gödel numbering, which is a means of encoding each formula or sequence of formulas as a natural number in a systematic and mechanical way.
It can be shown that there is a two-variable formula $\pi$ (x , y) such that $\pi$ (m , n) holds if and only if “n is a proof of m,” which is a shorthand way of saying that m is the Gödel number of a formula φ and n is the Gödel number of a string of formulas that constitutes a proof of φ. Slightly more elaborately, there is a formula ω (x , y) such that ω (m , n) holds if and only if m is the Gödel number of a formula φ that has one free variable and n is the Gödel number of a proof of φ (m). (A free variable is one that is not quantified over.
For example, φ (x) might be the formula (∃ y) y ${}^{2} =$ x, in which case x is the free variable. For this choice of φ, the number n would be the Gödel number of a proof that the Gödel number of φ was a perfect square .) Now let $\psi$ (x) be the formula (∀ y) (¬ ω (x , y)). If φ is a formula (with one free variable) with Gödel number m, then $\psi$ (m) tells us that there is no proof of φ (m). (It tells us this indirectly: what it actually says is that

$701$

there is no y that is the Gödel number of such a proof .) Let p be the Gödel number of $\psi$ itself, and let ζ be the formula $\psi(p)$ . This brings us to the second idea in the proof: selfreference. The formula ζ is carefully devised so that it asserts its own unprovability, since $\psi$ (p) tells us that there is no proof of the formula φ (p), where φ is the formula with Gödel number p. In other words, it tells us that there is no proof of $\psi$ (p) . Since ζ asserts its own unprovability, it must be unprovable (since a proof of ζ would be a proof that ζ had no proof, which is absurd).
Since ζ asserts its unprovability and is unprovable, it is true, and since it is true it cannot be disprovable. (One might wonder why this argument that ζ is true does not constitute a proof of ζ. The answer is that although it is a rigorous demonstration of the truth of ζ, it is not a proof in Peano arithmetic. That is, it is not an argument that starts from the Peano axioms and uses the rules of inference of the kind we discussed earlier .) Gödel numbering also allowed Gödel to consider the consistency of the axioms as a first-order formula:
namely (∀ y) (¬ ( $\pi$ (m , y))), where m is the Gödel number of the formula $0 = s(0)$ (or any other contradiction). Here is Gödel’s second theorem. It is impossible to prove from Peano’s axioms that they are consistent. The proofs of these theorems are not specific to the Peano axioms, but apply to any (consistent) system of mechanically recognizable axioms that is powerful enough to describe the natural numbers.
Thus, completeness cannot be restored simply by adding a true but unprovable statement as a new axiom, for the resulting system is still strong enough for Gödel’s theorem to apply to it. It might seem that we could obtain a complete axiomatization of the natural numbers by simply taking all true statements as axioms. However, one requirement for Gödel’s theorems is that the axioms should be recognizable by some mechanical method.
(This is needed to construct the formula $\pi$ (x , y) at the start of the proof .) Indeed, we can deduce from this that (as subsequently pointed out by turing [VI.94](/part-06/alan-turing-19121954)) the true statements about the natural numbers cannot be mechanically recognized (that is, their Gödel numbers do not form a recursive set). Gödel’s true but unprovable statement is important for the foundations of mathematics, but it has no intrinsic interest in its own right. Later, Paris and