# Gromov’s Polynomial-Growth Theorem

702                                                                                            V. Theorems and Problems

Harrington gave the first example of a mathematically             and joining g to h if there is some i such that h is equal
significant statement that is unprovable from Peano’s             either to ggi or to ggi−1 .
axioms. Their statement is a variant of ramsey’s the-               For each r , let γr be the number of elements that are
orem [IV.19 §2.2](/part-04/extremal-and-probabilistic-combinatorics). Subsequently, many other “natural             at a distance of at most r from the identity: that is, the
incompleteness es” have been found.                               number of elements that can be written as a “word” of
   Of course, the consistency of Peano’s axioms can be           length at most r in the generators and their inverses.
proved in a stronger system, since we could just add the         (For instance, if g = g1 g4 g2−3 , then we know that g
(unprovable) consistency statement. Less trivially, since        belongs to γ5 .) It turns out that if G is an infinite group,
a model of the natural numbers can be constructed                then the rate of growth of the sizes of the sets γr can
within set theory, the consistency of Peano arithmetic           tell one a great deal about G; this is particularly true
can be proved from the zermelo–fraenkel axioms                   when the growth is less than exponential. (The growth
[IV.22 §3.1](/part-04/set-theory) (known as ZFC) for set theory. Of course,           is always bounded above by an exponential function,
ZFC cannot prove its own consistency, but the consis-            since there are at most exponentially many words of a
tency of ZFC can be deduced from a yet stronger sys-             given length in the generators g1 , . . . , gr .)
tem (for example, adding an axiom that asserts the exis-            If G is an Abelian group generated by g1 , . . . , gk , then
                                                                                                            
tence of a suitably “large” cardinal number such as an           every element of γr is of the form ki=1 ai gi , where
                                                                                                       k
inaccessible cardinal [IV.22 §6](/part-04/set-theory)).                               a1 , . . . , ak are integers such that i=1 |ai | ⩽ r . It fol-
                                                                 lows easily that the size of γr is at most (2 r + 1)k (and
   For small enough parts of mathematics, it is some-
                                                                 with a bit more effort one can improve this bound).
times possible to find complete axiom systems (that
                                                                 Thus, as r tends to infinity, the growth rate of γr is
is, systems that allow one to prove every true state-
                                                                 bounded above by a polynomial of degree k in r . If G is
ment). For instance, this can be done for the theory of
                                                                 the free group [IV.10 §2](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory) generated by g1 , . . . , gk , then
the natural numbers with zero, the successor function,
                                                                 all words of length r in the elements gi (but not their
and addition alone. Thus, multiplication is essential to
                                                                 inverses) give rise to distinct elements of G, so the size
Gödel’s argument.
                                                                 of γr is at least kr . Thus, in this case the growth rate
  It is more elementary to see that Peano’s axioms are
                                                                 is exponential. More generally, there will be an expo-
not categorical: there are models for the axioms that
                                                                 nential growth rate whenever G contains a non-Abelian
are not isomorphic to the natural numbers. Such non-
                                                                 free subgroup.
standard models of arithmetic contain infinitely large
                                                                    These observations suggest that the growth rate is
numbers (that is, numbers that are larger than all
                                                                 likely to be smaller if G is more like an Abelian group.
natural numbers).
                                                                 Gromov’s theorem is a remarkably precise result along
  Gödel’s theorem has been a battleground for philoso-           these lines. It states that the growth rate of the sets γr
phers arguing about whether the human brain is a                 is bounded above by a polynomial in r if and only if
deterministic machine (in which case, presumably, we             G has a nilpotent subgroup of finite index. This condi-
would not be able to prove any formally unprovable               tion does indeed say that G is somewhat like an Abelian
statement). Fortunately, there is not enough space in            group, since nilpotent groups are “close to Abelian” and
this article for more details!                                   a subgroup of finite index is “close to the whole group.”
                                                                 For example, a typical nilpotent group is the Heisen-
The Goldbach Conjecture                                          berg group, which consists of all 3 . imes 3 matrices with
   See problems and results in additive                          0 s below the diagonal, 1 s on the diagonal, and integers
       number theory [V.27](/part-05/problems-and-results-in-vi36-peter-gustav-lejeune-dirichlet-18051859)                                      above the diagonal. Given any two such matrices X and
                                                                 Y , the products XY and Y X differ only in the top right-
                                                                 hand corner, and the “error matrix” XY −Y X commutes
V.16     Gromov’s Polynomial-Growth                              with everything in the group. In general, a nilpotent
         Theorem                                                 group is built out of Abelian groups in a controlled
                                                                 manner in a finite number of steps.
If G is a group and g1 , . . . , gk are generators of G (mean-      A fuller discussion of the theorem, including the
ing that every element of G can be expressed as a prod-          exact definition of “nilpotent,” can be found in geomet-
uct of the gi and their inverses), then we can define             ric and combinatorial group theory [IV.10](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory). Here
a Cayley graph by taking the elements of G as vertices           we highlight the fact that it is a beautiful example of a