# Liouville’s Theorem and Roth’s Theorem

710

G = Gal(f ) has afixed field H†, which is defined to be the set of all numbers a \in E such that φ(a) = a for$all$ H andφ \in HH†. Galois proved that the association between gives a one-to-one correspondence between subgroups of Gand fields which lie between Q and E (the so-called intermediate subfields of E). The con- dition that leads to certain special kinds of intermediate subfields, f (x) has a radical formula for its roots and hence to certain special subgroups oftually to Galois’s most famous theorem:
the polyno-G, and even- mialonly if its Galois group Galf (x) has a radical formula for its roots if and(f ) is a soluble group. (This means that1= G < G G<=· · ·Gal< G(f ) has a sequence of subgroups= G such that for each i, Gis agroupnormal subgroup0 G^+ /G^1 is Abelian.)[I.3 §3.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) ofr (Gi)+1 and the factori It follows from Galois’s theorem that to demonstrate(i1)i the insolubility of the quintic, it is enough to produce aquinticf (x) such that Gal(f ) is not a soluble group. An example of such a quintic is$f (x) = 2x^{5} - 5x^{4} +$5:
one can show first that Gal(f ) is isomorphic to the symmet- ric group Here is a brief sketch of how the argument goes. First$S^{5}$; and second that S5 is not a soluble group. one establishes that(i.e., is not the product of two rational polynomials off (x) is an irreducible polynomial smaller degree) with five distinct complex roots. Thus, as observed above, Gal(f ) can be regarded as a sub- group ofing the graph of S5 that permutes the five roots. By sketch-f (x) one can easily see that three of its roots are real and that the other two, call themandα , are complex conjugates of each other.
 Sinceα1 the complex conjugation map automorphism in Gal2(f ), it follows that Galz \to  $\bar{z}$ always gives an(f ) is a subgroup of Another basic general fact is that the Galois group of an S5 that contains a 2 - cycle, namely (α1α2). irreducible polynomial permutes the roots meaning that for any two rootsα , α there exists an transitively, automorphism in Gal group Gal(f ) is a subgroup of(f ) that sends Sthat permutes the fivei αi jto αj. Thus, our roots transitively and contains a 2 - cycle.
At this point some fairly elementary group theory shows that Gal5(f ) must actually be the whole of S is not a soluble group follows easily from the fact S5. Finally, the fact that that the alternating group group (i.e., it has no normal subgroups apart from the5 A5 is a non - Abelian simple identity subgroup and$A5 itself)$. of any degree These ideas can be extended to produce polynomialsn ⩾ 5 that have Galois group Sn, and that are therefore not soluble by radicals. The reason V.
Theorems and Problems this cannot be done for quartics, cubics, and quadratics is that S and all its subgroups are soluble groups. V.22 Liouville’s Theorem and Roth’s Theorem One of the most famous theorems in mathematics is the statement that. qrt{2} is irrational. This means that there is no pair of integers equivalently that the equationp and q psuch that2 = 2 q2 has no integer. qrt{2} = p/q, or solutions apart from the trivial solutio np = q = 0.
The argument that proves this can be considerably generalized, and, in fact, if coefficients and leading coefficient 1, then all its roots P (x) is any polynomial with integer are either integers or irrational numbers. For example, sincex3 + x - 1 is negative when x = 0 and positive whenx = 1 it must have a root strictly between 0 and 1. This root is not an integer, so it must be irrational. may seem as though not much more can be said. How - ever, this is very far from true:
given an irrational num-Once one has proved that a number is irrational, it ber, one can ask fascinating and extremely difficult questions arise ashow close it is to being rational, and soon as one does so. means, since every irrational number can be approx-imated as closely as you like by rational numbers. It is not immediately obvious what this question For example, the decimal expansion of1.414213 . . ., which tells us that . qrt{2} is within 1. qrt{2} begins/100 000 of the rational number 141 421/100 000.
More gener - ally, for any positive integer integer such thatp/q < . qrt{2}, and thenq we can letp/qp be the largest will be within 1 to/q. qrt{of2} with accuracy 1. qrt{2}. In other words, if we want an approximation/q, we can obtain it if we use a denominator of However, we can now ask the following question: areq. there denominators accuracy much better than 1 q for which one can one obtain an/q? The answer turns out to be yes. To see this, let sider the numbers 0$,\sqrt{2N}$,2 be a positive integer and con-. qrt{2}, $. . . , N \sqrt{2}$.
Each of these can be written in the formm+α, where m is an integer and there areα, the fractional part, lies between 0 and 1. Since N +1 numbers, at least two of their fractional parts must be within 1 can find integer sr < s between 0 and/N of each other. That is, we N such that if we write Thus, if we setr . qrt{2} = n+γα=andα-sβ. qrt, we have2 = m+β(s, then-r ). qrt|2α-=βn|-⩽m1/N+γ. and then|γ. qrt|2⩽=1/Np/q. If we now let+ γ/q, so |. qrt{q2}=-sp/q- r|and⩽ 1 p/q N= n. Since- m, N ⩾ q, 1/q N ⩽ 1/q2, so for at least some positive