# Problems and Results in                               VI.36   Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (1805–1859)

764

VI.36 Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet

b. Düren, French Empire (now Germany), 1805; d. Göttingen, Germany, 1859 Number theory; analysis; mathematical physics; hydrodynamics; probability theory The low level of mathematics education at German universities prompted Dirichlet to study in Paris, where hecame into contact with the leading French mathematicians Lacroix, particularly attracted him. In 1827 he took up a posi-poisson [VI.27](/part-06/simon-denis-poisson-17811840), and fourier [VI.25](/part-06/jean-baptiste-joseph-fourier-17681830), who tion at the University of Breslau.
The following year hemoved to Berlin, where he was appointed as a professor at the military academy and where he was also allowedto teach at the university. In 1831 he was made a professor at the university and from then on held positionsat both institutions until 1855, when he was appointed as the successor to Göttingen.
gauss [VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855) at the University of His guiding star was Gauss’s pioneering Dirichlet’s primary interest was in number theory. Disquisitiones arithmetic aeber theory into a mathematical discipline—which he(1801)—the work that made num studied through out his career. Dirichlet was not onlythe first mathematician to completely understand this work but he also became its interpreter, picking upits problems and improving its proofs, as well as developing its ideas. 1825, Dirichlet came to international prominence.
Thepaper, which dealt with Diophantine equations of the With his very first publication, which appeared in formx5 + y5 = Az5, yielded substantial results for the verification ofcasen = 5 (these results were used byfermat’s last theorem legendre[V.10](/part-05/fermats-last-theorem) for the[VI.24](/part-06/adrien-marie-legendre-17521833) for a complete proof for that case some weeks later). Ina paper published in 1837 Dirichlet came up with the new and revolutionary idea of applying analytical meth-ods to number theory.
He introduced expressions that are now known asseries of the form Dirichlet L-series. These are infinite

$\inftyχ(n)L(s$, χ) =ns

whereχ(n) is a Dirichlet charactern=1 modulo k: that is, a complex-valued function on the integers that is totally multiplicative, in the sense that$χ(ab) = χ(a)χ(b) for$ alltically zero. Using thesea and b, and χ is periodic with period L-series, Dirichlet showed thatk and not iden- every arithmetic progressionan + b:$n = 0$,1, . . . , wherea and bare relatively prime, contains infinitely

VI. Mathematicians

many prime numbers. In two subsequent papers, pub-lished in 1838 and 1839, he used his new methods, among other things, to determine the formula of the class number of binary quadratic forms: that is, thenumber of proper classes of forms of given determinant. It is often said that these three papers mark thestart of analytic number theory [IV.2](/part-04/number-theory). Dirichlet also made important contributions to algebraic number theory, culminating in hisrem [III.63](/part-03/number-fields) for the Abelian group of units in an alge-unit theobraic number field.
These contributions, together with numerous others due to him (e.g., his Sc hu bf a ch pr inz ip, or box principle; work on the law of biquadratic reciprocity; and results concerning Gaussian sums), were brought together in his influential Vorlesungen über zahlentheorie by his former student(lectures on number theory), published dedekind [VI.50](/part - 06/julius - wilhelm - richard - dedekind - 18311916) in 1863.
Inspired by his close contact with fourier [VI.25](/part - 06/jean - baptiste - joseph - fourier - 17681830) during his student days in Paris, Dirichlet’s other main interests were in analysis and mathematical physics, and in the connections between them. In a ground-breaking paper of 1829, Dirichlet not only gave the first strict proof of the convergence of a Fourier series under given conditions, but he also used new methods and concepts (e.g., his insight into the importance of conditional convergence of series;
his Dirichlet function influencing the development of the concept of a function) that became classic and that served as a basis for countless nineteenth - century investigations on analy - sis. He also occupied himself with the determination of multiple integrals as well as with the expansion ofa function into spherical functions (Kugelfunktionen) and applied these results to problems in mathematical physics. His main contributions to mathematical physics include papers on the theory of heat, hydrodynamics, the gravitational attraction of an ellipsoid, the n-body problem, and potential theory.
 The first boundary-value problem (the “Dirichlet problem” of finding the solution of an elliptic partial differential equation in the interior of a given region that takes prescribed values on the boundary of the region) had already been handled by Fourier and others, but Dirichlet proved the uniqueness of the solution, while the dirichlet principle ing boundary problems for[IV.12 §3.5](/part-04/analysis) (a method for solv-elliptic partial differential equations ational problems[IV.12 §2.5](/part-04/analysis) by reducing them to[III.94](/part-03/variational-methods)) was introduced by him
in var i lectures on potential theory, enhancing a method introduced by Gauss. Connected with Dirichlet’s work onanalysis was his contribution to probability and error