# Rational Points on Curves and                         VI.40   Ernst Eduard Kummer (1810–1893)

VI.41. Évariste Galois

VI.40 Ernst Eduard Kummer

b. Sorau (now Zary, Poland), 1810; d. Berlin, 1893 Gymnasium teacher, Liegnitz (now Legnica, Poland) 1832–42; Professor of Mathematics: Breslau (now Wroclaw, Poland) 1842–55, Berlin 1855–82 Kummer’s early research was in function theory, in which he made an important contribution to the theory of the (generalized) hypergeometric series (a powerseries in which the ratios of successive coefficients are rational functions).
Surpassing earlier work of gauss account of solutions to the hypergeometric differential[VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855), Kummer not only provided a systematic equation $x(x - 1)dd^{2}xy^{2} + (c - (a + b + 1)x) ddyx - aby = 0$, where connection between the hypergeometric functions anda, b, and c are constants, but also made the newer functions in analysis, such as the tions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem). elliptic func search in number theory, the field in which he achieved his greatest success:
the creation of the theory of “ideal After moving to Breslau, Kummer started doing re prime factors” (1845–47). Although Kummer’s theory is often described as an early contribution to the theory of ideals [III.81 §2](/part-03/rings-ideals-and-modules), his algorithmic approach was very different from that later followed by Kummer’s original goal had been to generalize the dedekind [VI.50](/part-06/julius-wilhelm-richard-dedekind-18311916).law of quadratic reciprocity [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871) to higher powers, and he succeeded in this in
1859. An additional conse-quence of this research was that he managed to prove fermat’s last theorem(and hence, since it was known for fourth powers, all[V.10](/part-05/fermats-last-theorem) for all prime exponents exponents) less than 100. algebraic geometry. Continuing the work of[VI.37](/part-06/william-rowan-hamilton-18051865) and In the third phase of his career Kummer turned to jacobi [VI.35](/part-06/carl-gustav-jacob-jacobi-18041851) on ray systems and geomet-hamilton ric optics, he was led to the discovery of the quartic surface with sixteen nodal points, which is now named after him.
VI.41 Évariste Galois b. Bourg-la-Reine, France, 1811; d. Paris, 1832 Theory of equations; theory of groups; Galois theory; finite fields Galois studied at home until he was eleven years old, then entered the Collège Louis-le-Grand in Paris, where he stayed for six years. He had, and gave his teachers, a difficult time there, but excelled in mathematics, in which he read advanced work of lagrange [VI.22](/part-06/joseph-louis-lagrange-17361813),

767

gauss texts of the time. He attempted the entrance examina-[VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855), and cauchy [VI.29](/part-06/augustin-louis-cauchy-17891857) alongside standard tion for the École Polytechnique prematurely in June 1828, but failed. In July 1829, after his father’s sui-cide, Galois was again rejected by the École Polytechnique. He entered the École Préparatoire (later known asthe École Normale Supérieure) in October 1829 but was expelled in December 1830 for unacceptable behaviour arising from political disagreements with the author i-ties.
Arrested on Bastille Day (14 July) 1831, he spent the next eight months in prison for flouting authority again. He emerged at the end of April 1832 but some how got himself challenged to a duel. On 29 May he edited his manuscripts and wrote a summary of his dis-coveries in a letter to his friend Auguste Chevalier. The duel took place the next morning and he died on 31 May1832. Much has been written about him.
But a man who dies so young leaves little real evidence for historians to work with, however rich his story, and most of his biographers have allowed romantic invention to colour their accounts of his life. cal works (and a number of smaller and less important There are four main papers in Galois’s mathemat i items). The first to be published was “Sur la théorie des nombres,” which appeared in April 1830 and contains the theory of Galois fields.
These are analogues of the complex numbers obtained by adjoining to the integers modulo a prime numberp a root of an irreducible poly- nomial congruence modulo of the basic features of what later became the theory ofp. The paper contains most finite fields. In the letter to Chevalier written on the eve of the duel, Galois mentions three memoirs.
The first, now known as thet led “Sur les conditions de résolubilité des équations Premier Mémoire, is a manuscript entipar radicaux.” Galois submitted work on the theory ofequations to the Paris Academy on 25 May and 1 June 1829, but this is now lost and it seems quite possible that Galois with drew it on the advice of Cauchy (towhom it had been given to referee) in January 1830.
In February 1830 he resubmitted his work in compe-tition for the Grand Prix de Mathématiques, but his manuscript was unfortunately and mysteriously loston the death of fourier [VI.25](/part-06/jean-baptiste-joseph-fourier-17681830) (and the prize was awarded jointly to jacobi [VI.35](/part-06/carl-gustav-jacob-jacobi-18041851)). Encouraged to do so byabel [VI.33](/part-06/niels-henrik-abel-18021829), posthumously, and poisson [VI.27](/part - 06/simon - denis - poisson - 17811840) he submitted his ideas to the Academy for a third timein January 1831.
It is this third submission (which was read by the Academy referees, Poisson and Lacroix, and rejected on 4 July 1831) that survives as the manuscript