# The Atiyah–Singer Index Theorem

Theorems and Problems

V.1 The ABC Conjecture

The ABC conjecture, proposed by Masser and Oesterlé in 1985, is a bold and very general conjecture in number theory with a wide range of important consequences. The rough idea of the conjecture is that it is impossible for one number to be the sum of two others if all three numbers have many repeated prime factors and no two have a prime factor in common (which would then have to be shared by the third).More precisely, one defines the radical of a positive integern, with each distinct prime included just once.
Forn to be the product of all primes that divide instance, 3960$= 23 \times 32 \times 5 \times 11$, so its radical is$2$. imes  3 . imes  5 . imes  11 = 330. Let us write rad(n) for the radical oftive real numbern. The ABC conjecture asserts that for every posi-there is a constant K such that ifac < K, b, andradc(abc)are coprime integers an(d1)+$. a + b = c$, then sider the Fermat equation tive integers To get a feel for the meaning of this conjecture, con-x, y , and z solve the equation, then we canxr + yr = zr.
If three posi- divide through by any common factors they might have and obtain a solution for whichx, y, and z, and hence theirr th powers, are coprime. Set a = xr , b = yr, andc = zr. Then$rad$(abc) = rad(xyz) ⩽ xyz = (abc)1^/r ⩽ c3^/r, where the last inequality follows from the fact thatis greater than botha or b. If we set to be1, thenc the ABC conjecture gives us a constant cannot be more than K(c3/r )7/6 = Kc7/2 r K.
Ifsuch thatr ⩾64 thenc the power 7 can have at most finitely many solutions with/2 r is less than 1, so the Fermat equationx, y, andz coprime. It is clear that this is just one of a huge number of consequences of a similar kind. For instance, we could deduce that there are only finitely many solutions of the equation 2 ical of 2 r 3 s x2 is at most 6 r + x3 s, which is considerably= x2, since the rad-

Part V

smaller than$x^{2}$. But the ABC conjecture has other con- sequences that are less obvious, and more important, than this one. For instance, Bombieri has shown that the ABC conjecture implies Elkies has shown that it implies the roth’s theorem mordell conjec-[V.22](/part-05/liouvilles-theorem-and-roths-theorem), ture strengthening of the ABC conjecture implies the non-[V.29](/part-05/rational-points-on-curves-and-vi40-ernst-eduard-kummer-18101893), and Granville and Stark have shown that a existence of Siegel zeros (these are defined in number theory [IV.2](/part-04/number-theory)).
It is also equivalent to strong analytic forms, as yet unproven, of a famous theorem of Baker in transcendence theory, and of the theorem of Wiles about last theorem.modular forms [III.59](/part-03/modular-forms) that implies Fermat’s tational number theory The ABC conjecture is discussed further in[IV.3](/part-04/computational-number-theory).
compu V.2 The Atiyah–Singer Index Theorem Nigel Higson and John Roe 1 Elliptic Equations The Atiyah–Singer index theorem is concerned with the existence and uniqueness of solutions to linear partial differential equations ofthis concept, consider the two equations elliptic type. To understand . artial f. artial x + . artial y. artial f = 0 and . artial f. artial x + i . artial f. artial y = 0. They differ only by the factor i$= \sqrt{-1}$, but their solu- tions nevertheless have very different properties.
Any function of the form$f$ (x$, y) = g(x - y) \text{is a solu}-$ tion to the first equation, but in the analogous gen-eral solutiong(x + iy) of the second equation, g must be a variable holomorphic function z = x + iy, and it was already known in the[I.3 §5.6](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions) of the complex nineteenth century that such functions are very spe - cial.
For example, the first equation has an infinite dimensional set of bounded solutions, but theorem [I.3 §5.6](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions) in complex analysis asserts that the liouville’s only bounded solutions of the second equation are the constant functions.