# The Prime Number Theorem and the                      VI.34   János Bolyai (1802–1860)

762

Further Reading

Del Centina, A. 2006. Abel’s surviving manuscripts includ-ing one recently found in London. Historia Mathematica Holmboe, B., ed. 1839.33:224–33.Abel, two volumes. (Second edn.: 1881, edited by L. SylowŒuvres Complètes de Niels Henrik Ore, O. 1957.and S. Lie. Christiania: Grøndahl & Søn.)nary. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.Niels Henrik Abel: Mathematician Extraordi Stubhaug, A. 1996.(Reprinted, 1974. New York: Chelsea.)Hans Tid. Oslo: Aschehoug. (English translation: 2000, Et Foranskutt Lyn: Niels Henrik Abel Og Niels Henrik Abel and His Times: Called Too Soon by Flames Afar, translated by R. H. Daly. New York: Springer.) Peter M. Neumann VI.34 János Bolyai b. Klausenburg, Transylvania, Hungary (now Cluj, Romania), 1802; d. Marosvásárhely, Hungary (now Tirgu-Mures, Romania), 1860 Non-Euclidean geometry János Bolyai’s father Farkas Bolyai taught him mathe-matics at home, using the first six books of euclid’s [VI.2](/part-06/euclid-ca)1818 and 1823 János studied at the Royal Engineer-Elements and euler’s [VI.19](/part-06/leonhard-euler-17071783) Algebra. Between ing Academy in Vienna, and then served as an engi-neer in the Austrian Army for ten years, before retiring on a pension as a semi-invalid. Probably inspiredby his father’s attempts to prove the parallel postulate, a key assumption in Euclidean geometry, but very much against the advice of his father, János also attempted to prove it. But in 1820 he switched direction and attempted to show that there could be a geom-etry independent of the parallel postulate. By 1823 he believed he had succeeded, and after much subsequent discussion father and son agreed to publish the son’s ideas as a twenty-eight-page appendix to his father’stwo-volume work on geometry in 1832. of parallels, according to which, given a line in a plane In this appendix, Bolyai started from a new definition and a point not on the line, there are many lines through the point that do not meet the given line. Of these lines, there are two that are asymptotic to the givenline (one in each direction), and Bolyai called these the parallels to the given line through the given point. Hewent on to derive many results that follow from this assumption in the geometry of two and three dimen-sions, and gave formulas for the new trigonometry of triangles. He showed that these formulas reduce to the familiar formulas of plane Euclidean geometry when

VI. Mathematicians

the triangles are very small. He also found a surface inhis three-dimensional geometry in which geometry is Euclidean. He concluded that there were logically two geometries and that it remained undecided which one corresponded to reality. He also showed that in his new geometry it was possible to construct a square equal inarea to a given circle, thus accomplishing a feat that was widely (and, as was later shown, correctly) believed to be impossible in Euclidean geometry.A copy of the book was sent to gauss [VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855), who eventually replied on March 6, 1832, that he could not praise the work, for “to praise it, would be to praise myself,” going on to claim that the methods and results in the appendix agreed with his own work over the pre-vious thirty-five years, although he was “very glad that it was just the son of my old friend, who takes the precedence of me in such a remarkable manner.” this endorsement of the validity of János’s ideas pleased the father but infuriated the son, and soured rela-tions between father and son for several years. They did eventually resume an uncomfortable relationship, which persisted until Farkas’s death in 1856. discovery was not appreciated in his lifetime. Indeed, János Bolyai published virtually nothing else, and his it is unclear that anyone but Gauss ever read it, but specific comments about it that Gauss left behind led mathematicians back to it, and it was translated into French by Hoüel in 1867 and into English in 1896 (reprinted in 1912 and 2004).

Further Reading

Gray, J. J. 2004.the Nature of Space János Bolyai, Non-Euclidean Geometry and. Cambridge, MA: Burndy Library, MIT Press.

Jeremy Gray

VI.35 Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi

b. Potsdam, Germany, 1804; d. Berlin, 1851 Theory of functions; number theory; algebra; differential equations; calculus of variations; analytical mechanics; perturbation theory; history of mathematics Jacobi grew up as Jacques Simon Jacobi in a wealthy and well-educated Jewish family. He was baptized dur-ing his first year at the University of Berlin in 1821, probably in order to make it possible for him to followan academic career at a time when Jews were ineligible for academic positions. Jacobi studied classics under the famous philologist Boeckh and philosophy under Hegel. Owing to the mediocrity of the mathematics
