# The Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture

V.4. The Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture

theory. To introduce this example of bad behavior, wefirst consider an example of good behavior. Suppose thatandf (xf: R+\to 1)R=is a reasonable function withf (x) for all x (thus, f is nonneg at iv ef (x) ⩾ 0 and periodic with period 1). Suppose that there existed real numbers$s$, t, u, v such thatf (x + s) + f (x + t) - f (x + u) - f (x + v) ⩽ -1 (1) for all integrating both sides of (1) from 0 to 1 would givex. Sinc(e0)1 f (x + w) dx =01 f (x) dx for all w,$0$⩽0 1(-1) dx = −1, which is impossible.
Thus (1) cannot hold. Now consider the free group [IV.10 §2](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory)G generated byb where no nontrivial relations hold betweena and b (that is to say, the group generated bya anda andb). Every element ofthe product of a sequence, each term of which is G can be written in shortest form asa, a-1, bof, orx bends with - 1. Definea F(x)or a=-11 if, and setx = e F(x)or the shortest form= 0 otherwise.
We see that F(x) ⩾ 0 for all x \in  G, and the reader can check, by going through cases, that F(xb) + F(xab) - F(xa-1) - F(xb-1 a) ⩽ -1 (2) for allto show that (1) was false forx \in  G. The averaging argument that enabled us R must fail for G since (2) is, in fact, true. If there is no averaging argument, thenthere can be no appropriate universal integral and no appropriate universal “volume” in This example bears a clear family resemblance to the G. “paradoxes” discussed earlier.
If we consider the group SO(3) of rotations in three dimensions, then (unless specific conditions hold) there is no nontrivial group relation between two generally chosen rotations A and Btains a copy of the group about two generally chosen axes. Thus SOG considered in the previous(3) con- paragraph. The Banach–Tarski construction is a mod-ification of a construction of Hausdorff that exploits this fact. There is a beautiful account of all these matters in The Banach–Tarski Paradox University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1993).by Stan Wagon (Cambridge V.4 The Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer

Conjecture

Given an elliptic curve [III.21](/part-03/elliptic-curves), there is a natural way of defining a binary operation on its points, and thisturns the elliptic curve into an abelian group [I.3 §2.1](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). Moreover, the points on the curve with rational coordin-

685

ates form a subgroup of this group. Mordell’s theorem tells us that this subgroup is finitely generated. (These results are described in rational points on curves and the mordell conjecture Every finitely generated Abelian group is isomorphic[V.29](/part-05/rational-points-on-curves-and-vi40-ernst-eduard-kummer-18101893).) to a group of the form C stands for the cyclic group with Zr . imes (Cn)1 . imes (Cn)2 ×· · ·×n elements. The(Cn)k, where numbern r , which measures the maximum number of independent elements of this group that have infinite order, is called the rank of the elliptic curve.
Mordell’s theorem implies that the rank of every elliptic curveis finite, but it does not tell us how to calculate it. That turns out to be an extraordinarily hard problem: in fact, so hard that it is considered a remarkable achievement of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer even to have come up with a plausible conjecture about it. Their conjecture relates the rank of an elliptic curve to a very different object associated with that curve: anties similar to those of the L-function [III.47](/part-03/l-functions).
This is a function with proper-riemann zeta function [IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory), but it is defined in terms of a series of num-bers N (E), N (E), N (E), . . . , one for each prime p; the number2 N^p(E)^3 is the number of points on the elliptic^5 curve when it is considered as a curve over the[I.3 §2.2](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) withp elements. One of the properties of thefield Lfact that it can be extended to a holomorphic func--function of E is that it is holomorphic[I.3 §5.6](/part-01/fundamental-definitions).
(The tion every where on the complex plane is very far from obvious: it follows from the fact that all elliptic curvesare modular. See fermat’s last theorem [V.10](/part-05/fermats-last-theorem).) Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjectured that the rank of thegroup associated with the elliptic curve is equal to the order of the zero of its L-function at 1.
(If the L-function does not take the value 0 at 1, then this order is definedto be 0.) This can be thought of as a sophisticated local-to-global principle the rational solutions to the equation for the elliptic[III.51](/part-03/local-and-global-in-number-theory), in that it relates curve to the solutions modp for each prime p. far less was known about elliptic curves when Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer made it. Now there are many reasons Another remarkable feature of the conjecture is that to find it plausible, but then it was much more of aleap in the dark:
they based it on numerical evidence gleaned from computations oftic curves and many primesp. In other words, they did Np (E) for several ellip- not calculate the orders of zeros ofous elliptic curves, since that was too hard, but guessed L-functions of vari- them based on approximations. proved for curves with The Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture has now been L-functions that have a zero