# The Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture

$V$ . $4$ .

The Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture

theory. To introduce this example of bad behavior, we first consider an example of good behavior. Suppose that $f$ : $R \to R$ is a reasonable function with $f(x) \ge 0$ and f (x $+ 1 ) =$ f (x) for all x (thus , f is nonnegative and periodic with period $1$ ). Suppose that there existed real numbers s, t, u, v such that

$f(x + s) + f(x + t) - f(x + u) - f(x + v) \le - 1 (1)11$

for all  x. Since ${}^{0} f(x + w)dx = {}^{0} f(x)dx$ for all w, integrating both sides of (1) from $0$ to $1$ would give

$1( - 1)dx = - 1$ ,

$0 \le 0$

which is impossible. Thus ( $1$ ) cannot hold. Now consider the free group [IV.10](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory) G generated by $a$ and  b(that is to say, the group generated by $a$ and $b$ where no nontrivial relations hold between $a$ and  b ). Every element of G can be written in shortest form as the product of a sequence, each term of which is a, a $- 1$ ,  b,$or$ b - 1 . Define $F(x) = 1$ if $x = e$ or the shortest form of x ends with $a$ or $a - 1$ , and set $F(x) = 0$ otherwise.
We see that $F(x) \ge 0$ for all $x\inG,$ and the reader can check, by going through cases, that F $(xb) +$ F( xab )$- F(xa - 1) - F(xb - 1a) \le - 1(2)$

for all x $\in$ G. The averaging argument that enabled us to show that ( $1$ ) was false for R must fail for G since ( $2$ ) is, in fact, true. If there is no averaging argument, then there can be no appropriate universal integral and no appropriate universal “volume” in G. This example bears a clear family resemblance to the “paradoxes” discussed earlier. If we consider the group SO ( $3$ ) of rotations in three dimensions, then (unless specific conditions hold) there is no nontrivial group relation between two generally chosen rotations A and B about two generally chosen axes.
Thus SO ( $3$ ) contains a copy of the group G considered in the previous paragraph. The Banach-Tarski construction is a modification of a construction of Hausdorff that exploits this fact. There is a beautiful account of all these matters in The Banach-Tarski Paradox by Stan Wagon (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1993 ).

$V$ . $4$

The Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer

Conjecture

Given an elliptic curve [III.21](/part-03/elliptic-curves), there is a natural way of defining a binary operation on its points, and this turns the elliptic curve into an abelian group [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). Moreover, the points on the curve with rational coordin- $685$ ates form a subgroup of this group. Mordell’s theorem tells us that this subgroup is finitely generated.
(These results are described in rational points on curves and the mordell conjecture [V.29](/part-05/rational-points-on-curves-and-vi40-ernst-eduard-kummer-18101893).) Every finitely generated Abelian group is isomorphic to a group of the form Zr . imes (Cn)1 . imes (Cn)2 . imes · · · . imes (Cn)k , where C n stands for the cyclic group with n elements. The number r , which measures the maximum number of independent elements of this group that have infinite order, is called the rank of the elliptic curve.
Mordell’s theorem implies that the rank of every elliptic curve is finite, but it does not tell us how to calculate it. That turns out to be an extraordinarily hard problem: in fact, so hard that it is considered a remarkable achievement of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer even to have come up with a plausible conjecture about it. Their conjecture relates the rank of an elliptic curve to a very different object associated with that curve: an L-function [III.47](/part-03/l-functions).
This is a function with properties similar to those of the riemann zeta function [IV.2](/part-04/number-theory), but it is defined in terms of a series of numbers $N^{2}$ (E), $N^{3}$ (E), $N^{5}$ (E), . . . , one for each prime p; the number N p (E) is the number of points on the elliptic curve when it is considered as a curve over the field [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) with p elements. One of the properties of the L-function of E is that it is holomorphic [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) .
(The fact that it can be extended to a holomorphic function every where on the complex plane is very far from obvious: it follows from the fact that all elliptic curves are modular. See fermat’s last theorem [V.10](/part-05/fermats-last-theorem).) Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjectured that the rank of the group associated with the elliptic curve is equal to the order of the zero of its L-function at $1$ .
(If the L-function does not take the value $0$ at $1$ , then this order is defined to be $0$ .) This can be thought of as a sophisticated local-to-global principle [III.51](/part-03/local-and-global-in-number-theory), in that it relates the rational solutions to the equation for the elliptic curve to the solutions mod p for each prime p. Another remarkable feature of the conjecture is that far less was known about elliptic curves when Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer made it. Now there are many reasons to find it plausible, but then it was much more of a leap in the dark:
they based it on numerical evidence gleaned from computations of N p (E) for several elliptic curves and many primes p. In other words, they did not calculate the orders of zeros of L-functions of various elliptic curves, since that was too hard, but guessed them based on approximations. The Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture has now been proved for curves with L-functions that have a zero