# The Banach–Tarski Paradox

684

simplest example involves the elliptic equation dd$^{*}ω =$0, concerning differential forms on a mani-$ω +$ fold$M$. The Fredholm index may be identified with theing sum of the numbers of Euler characteristic of Mr, which is the alternat--dimensional cells in a cell decomposition ofifolds, the Euler characteristic is the familiar quan-M. For two-dimensional man- tity V - E + F. In the two-dimensional case, the index theorem reproduces the Gauss–Bonnet theorem, which asserts that the Euler characteristic is a multiple of thetotal Gaussian curvature. used to produce topological restrictions on the waysa manifold can curve. Many important applications of Even in this simple case, the index theorem can be the index theorem proceed in the same direction. For example, Hitchin used a more refined application of the Atiyah–Singer index theorem to show that there isa nine-dimensional manifold that is homeomorphic to the sphere despite not being positively curved in eventhe weakest sense. (By contrast, the usual sphere is positively curved in the strongest possible sense.)

Further Reading

Atiyah, M. F. 1967. Algebraic topology and elliptic opera-tors. Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics Atiyah, M. F., and I. M. Singer. 1968. The index of elliptic20:237–49.operators. I. Annals of Mathematics 87:484–530. Hirzebruch, F. 1966.ometry. New York: Springer.Topological Methods in Algebraic Ge Hitchin, N. 1974. Harmonic spinors.ics 14:1–55. Advances in Mathemat V.3 The Banach–Tarski Paradox T. W. Körner The Banach–Tarski paradox states that there is a wayof decomposing a three-dimensional ball of unit radius into a finite number of disjoint pieces, then reassem-bling the pieces to form two balls of unit radius, where “reassembling” means that the pieces are translated and rotated and that they end up still disjoint. indeed it contradicts the naive assumption that one can consistently assign a finite volume to every bounded Such a result seems impossible at first sight, and set. In other words, it shows that one cannot assign vol-umes to all bounded sets in such a way that these volumes are unaffected by translation and rotation, thatthe volume of a union of two disjoint sets is the sum of the volumes of the two sets, and that the volume

V. Theorems and Problems

of the unit ball is greater than zero. However, if wedrop this naive assumption, then the paradox disappears. Since there is no genuine paradox, we shall referto the Banach–Tarski construction. an older construction due to Vitali, which concerns arearather than volume. Let us write The Banach–Tarski construction is a descendant ofl for the line segment in R2 that is given in polar coordinates by$θl^{θ} = \\{(r}$, θ)\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\}: 0$< r ⩽ 1$.

Note that the union of all such segments is the punc-tured unit disk D* (that is to say, the unit disk with the origin removed). We say thatsame equivalence class ifθ - lφθ andis a rational multiplelφ belong to the ofofπl , and we consider a set containing exactly one representative E that is the union of a setfrom each equivalence class.The rationals areθ countable [III.11](/part-03/countable-and-uncountable-sets), so we can enu- merate the rationals$x with 0 ⩽ x < 1 \text{as a sequencex}^{1}$, x2, . . . . \text{If we write En} = {lθ + 2πx}:$l^{θ} \in E$, n

then each origin (through an angle 2 En is obtained fromπxn E), theby a rotation about the En are disjoint (as Elence class), and the union of the contains only one representative from each equiva-E is D* (as E contains a representative from each equivalence class).n the union of the setsthe union of the sets Now take D* and split it into the set E(E2()n)+ and the set. Each E can be rotated to GF consisting of consisting of En, and the union of th(e2)n(En)1 gives u(s2)n D^*. Similarly, each Egives u(s2()n)+1 can be rotated to D^* again. Thus the punctured unit disk can be En, and the union of the En split into a countable set of disjoint pieces (all obtained by rotation of one particular set) which can be rotated and translated to form disjoint sets whose union is two copies of D*. choice from each equivalence class), and the same is true for Vitali’s construction makes use of[III.1](/part - 03/axiom - of - choice) (because we chose one representative the axiom of the Banach–Tarski construction. Solovay showed thatif we reject the axiom of choice, then there are models of set theory assign a volume to all bounded sets in[IV.22 §3](/part - 04/set - theory) in which it Ris3 in a consis - possible to tent way. However, most mathematicians would agreethat the natural moral to draw from our discussion is that when we define volume we should consider only arestricted collection of sets. lated to our final example, which requires a little group The Banach–Tarski construction is also closely re-
