# Abraham Robinson (1918–1974)

822

included important work on thetion [IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory). He was busy working on biological riemann zeta func theory and new ideas in physics at the time of his sudden death.Turing’s short life combined the purest mathematics and the most practical applications. It was also markedby other contrasts. Although he promoted the theme of computer-based artificial intelligence, there was nothing mechanical about his thought or life. The wit anddrama of the “Turing test” have made him a lasting figure in the popularization of mathematical ideas. the dramatization of his life, drawing on the extraordinary secrecy of his war work, and his subsequent persecu-tion as a homosexual, have also attracted great public interest.

Further Reading

Hodges, A. 1983.Simon & Schuster.Alan Turing: The Enigma. New York: Turing, A. M. 1992–2001.Turing. Amsterdam: Elsevier.The Collected Works of A. M.

Andrew Hodges

VI.95 Abraham Robinson

b. Waldenburg (Lower Silesia; now Walbrzych, Poland), 1918; d. New Haven, Connecticut, 1974 Applied mathematics; logic; model theory; nonstandard analysis Robinson was educated at a private Rabbinical schooland then at the Jewish High School in Breslau until 1933, when he emigrated with his family to Palestine.There Robinson finished high school, going on to study mathematics at the Hebrew University under Abraham Fraenkel. He spent the spring of 1940 at the Sorbonne, but when the Germans invaded France Robinson made his way to England. There he spent the war as a refugee, in the service of the Free French Forces. Robinson’s mathematical talents were soon recognized, and he was assigned to the Royal Aircraft Establishment in Farnborough, where he was part of a team designing supersonic delta wings and reconstructing German V-2 rockets to determine how they worked. After the war, Robinson received his M.Sc. degree in mathematics from the Hebrew University, with minors in physics and philosophy. Several years later, he completed his Ph.D. in mathematics at Birkbeck College, London. His thesis,“On the metamathematics of algebra,” was published in

1951.

College of Aeronautics since its founding in Cranfield in Meanwhile, Robinson had been teaching at the Royal

VI. Mathematicians

October of 1946. Although promoted to Deputy Head ofthe Department of Aeronautics in 1950, in the following year Robinson accepted a position, at the rank of associate professor, at the University of Toronto in the Department of Applied Mathematics. While at Toronto, most of his publications were devoted to applied math-ematics, including papers on supersonic airfoil design and a book he coauthored with his former student from Cranfield, J. A. Laurmann, on His years at Toronto (1951–57) proved to be a tran-Wing Theory. sitional period in Robinson’s career, as his interests turned increasingly toward mathematical logic, beginning with studies of algebraically closed fields of characteristic zero. In 1955 he published a book in french summarizing much of his early work in mathematical logic and matique des Ideaux model theory. Robinson was a pioneering con-[IV.23](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory), Théorie Métamathétributor to model theory, which at its simplest uses mathematical logic to analyze mathematical structures(like groups, fields, or even set theory itself). Given an axiomatic system, aisfies the axioms. One of his early impressive results model is a structure that satwas a model-theoretic proof, which he published in 1955 inteenth problem, namely that a positive-definite rational Mathematische Annalen, of Hilbert’s seven function over the reals can be expressed as a sum ofsquares of rational functions. This was soon followed by another book, Complete Theories (1956), which further extended ideas he had explored earlier in his thesison model-theoretic algebra. Here Robinson introduced such important concepts as model completeness, model completion, and the “prime model test,” along with proofs of the completeness of real-closed fields [IV.23 §5](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory) and the uniqueness of the model completion of a model-complete theory. University, where he assumed the chair formerly heldby his teacher Abraham Fraenkel in the Einstein Insti-In the fall of 1957 Robinson returned to the Hebrew tute of Mathematics. While at the Hebrew University, Robinson worked on aspects of local differential algebra, differentially closed fields, and in logic on[VI.81](/part-06/thoralf-skolem-18871963) results dealing with nonstandard models ofskolem’s arithmetic. These provide models of ordinary peano arithmetic gers (0, 1, 2, 3[III.67](/part-03/the-peano-axioms), the usual arithmetic of the inte-, . . .), but ones that include “nonstandard” elements, “numbers” that extend the scope of the stan - dard model to models that are larger but nevertheless satisfy the axioms of the standard structure. A nonstandard model of arithmetic may include, for example, infinite integers. As Haim Gaifman puts it succinctly, “A
