# Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmı̄         VI.55   William Kingdon Clifford (1845–1879)

780

that are not members of themselves: is it a member ofitself or not? (See the crisis in the foundations of mathematics [II.7 §2.1](/part-02/foundations-crisis).) Cantor himself was aware of the contradictions that arose from considering the col-lections of all transfinite ordinal or cardinal numbers, and what their ordinal or cardinal numbers might be.The solution Cantor adopted was to regard such collections as too large, and not really sets at all, but “in consistent aggregates” as he called them. Others, like Zer-melo, began to axiomatize set theory in an effort to exclude the possibility of contradictions. The two most powerful results of the twentieth century to complement Cantor’s work are those of gödel [VI.92](/part-06/kurt-gdel-19061978) (who established the consistency of the continuum hypoth-esis with zermelo–fraenkel set theory [IV.22 §3](/part-04/set-theory)) and Paul Cohen (who determined the independence ofthe continuum hypothesis from Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory), the latter finally establishing the impossibility of proving the continuum hypothesis. truly been revolutionary. Above all, his transfinite settheory for the first time gave mathematicians the Cantor’s legacy for the history of mathematics has means of dealing with concepts of the infinite in acareful and precise way.

Further Reading

Dauben, J. W. 1990.losophy of the Infinite Georg Cantor. His Mathematics and Phi-. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. (First published in 1978 by Harvard University Press.) theory. Inety for History and Philosophy of Mathematics. 2005. Georg Cantor and the battle for transfinite set Kenneth O. May Lectures of the Canadian Soci-, edited by G. Van Brummelen and M. Kinyon, pp. 221–41. New York: Springer. a general set theory” (1883). In Western Mathematics 1640–1940. 2005. Georg Cantor. Paper on the “Foundations of, edited by I. Grattan-Landmark Writings in Tapp, C. 2005.Guinness, pp. 600–12. London: Routledge.torische Aufarbeitung der Korrespondenz zwischen Georg Kardinalität und Kardinäle. Wissenschaft sh is Cantor und katholischen Theologen seiner Zeit Franz Steiner. . Stuttgart: Joseph W. Dauben VI.55 William Kingdon Clifford b. Exeter, England, 1845; d. Madeira, Portugal, 1879 Geometry; complex function theory; popularization of mathematics Clifford went up to Trinity College Cambridge in 1863.He graduated from there in 1867 as 2 nd Wrangler and

VI. Mathematicians

also came second in the more demanding Smith’s prize examination. In 1868 he became a Fellow of Trinity, leaving in 1871 to become the professor of applied mathematics at University College London. He died of tuberculosis in 1879. A versatile mathematician, regarded by many as the best of his generation, Clifford’s favorite field was geometry, over which he ranged widely, proving new results in classical Euclidean geometry as well as in projective and differential geometry. He was the first English mathematician to appreciate the work of riemann [VI.49] on differential geometry, and published a translation of Riemann’s paper “On the hypothe-ses that lie at the foundations of geometry” in 1873. He endorsed Riemann’s fundamental reformulation of geometry, and went even further in speculating that the curvature of physical space might explain the motion of matter. He also made a significant application of thethe first to analyze the complicated topological nature riemann–roch theorem [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem), and was among of a riemann surface [III.79](/part-03/riemann-surfaces) by showing how to dissect any Riemann surface into simple pieces in a stan-dard way. He was the first to study a geometry locally equivalent to plane geometry but topologically distinct(the flat torus, also known today as the Clifford–Klein space form after klein’s [VI.57] later more detailed study of it). In algebra, he invented the biquaternions(these are like quaternions, but have complex numbers as coefficients). Clifford was regarded as a marvelous lecturer until his health broke, and he was a successful popularizer and essay writer. He forcefully adopted the view that geometry was a matter of experience, not a priori truth. He was a friend of T. H. Huxley and was sympathetic tohumanism in philosophy.

Further Reading

Clifford, W. K. 1968.R. Tucker. New York: Chelsea. (First published in 1882.)Mathematical Papers, edited by

Jeremy Gray

VI.56 Gottlob Frege

b. Wismar, Germany, 1848; d. Bad Kleinen, Germany, 1925 Logic; foundations of mathematics; paradox Frege was a precursor of modern logic, in that many of the hallmarks of contemporary logic appear first in his writing. His work has also been singularly influential
