# Alan Turing (1912–1954)

$VI$ . $94$ .

Alan Turing

insightfully to many subjects that were in the air at the time. To mention just a few: the Weil groups of class field theory [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871); the explicit formulas of analytic number theory; various aspects of differential geometry, in particular kähler manifolds [III.88](/part-03/symplectic-manifolds); the determination of Dirichlet series by their functional equations. All of these topics point to seminal works with out which today’s mathematics would not be what it is.
In his later years, Weil put his erudition and historical sense to work writing articles and a book on the history of mathematics: Number Theory, an Approach through History. He also published a partial autobiography ending in 1945 , Souvenirs d’Apprentissage, of considerable literary quality. Further Reading Weil, A. 1976 . Elliptic Functions According to Eisenstein and Kronecker. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, volume $88$ . Berlin: Springer. . 1980 . Oeuvres Scientifiques / Collected Papers, second edn. Berlin: Springer. . 1984 . Number Theory. An Approach through History.
 From Hammurapi to Legendre. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser. . 1991 . Souvenirs d’Apprentissage. Basel: Birkhäuser 1991 . (English translation: 1992 , The Apprenticeship of a Mathematician. Basel: Birkh ä user .) Norbert Schappacher and Birgit Petri $VI$ . $94$ Alan Turing  b. London, 1912 ;  d. Wilmslow, England, 1954 Logic; computing; cryptography; mathematical biology In 1936 , as a young Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge, Alan Turing made a crucial contribution to mathematical logic:
he defined “computability” with what is now called the turing machines [IV.20](/part-04/computational-complexity). Although mathematically equivalent to a definition of effective calculability earlier given by church [VI.89](/part-06/alonzo-church-19031995), Turing’s concept was compelling because of his entirely original philosophical analysis. It won the endorsement of Church, and indeed also of gödel [VI.92](/part-06/kurt-gdel-19061978), whose 1931 incompleteness theorem [V.15](/part-05/gdels-theorem) under lay Turing’s investigation.
Using his definition, Turing showed that first-order logic was undecidable, and thus dealt the final death blow to hilbert’s [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) form a list program. (See logic and model theory [IV.23](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory) for more details .) Computability is now fundamental in mathematics, in that it gives an exact meaning to the question of $821$ whether a method exists to solve a problem.
As an illustration, hilbert’s tenth problem [V.20](/part-05/the-insolubility-of-the-halting-problem), on the general solubility of Diophantine equations, was completely resolved in 1970 by methods connected with Turing’s ideas. Turing himself pioneered extensions of his definition in mathematical logic, and applications of it in algebra. However, he was unusual as a mathematician in that he explored not only the mathematical uses of his ideas (in questions of decidability in algebra) but also the wider implications for philosophy, science, and engineering.
One factor in Turing’s breakthrough was his fascination with the problem of mind and matter. Turing’s analysis of mental states and operations has since become a point of departure for the cognitive sciences. Turing himself blazed this trail later by his advocacy of the possibility of artificial intelligence. His famous 1950 “Turing test” was part of an extensive range of research proposals in this field.
A more immediately applicable aspect of his 1936 work lay in his observation that a single “universal” machine could do the work of any Turing machine, by reading the description of that machine as a table of instructions. This is the essential principle of the modern digital computer, whose programs are themselves data structures. In 1945 Turing used this insight to plan a first electronic computer and its programming.
He was preempted by von neumann [VI.91](/part-06/john-von-neumann-19031957), but it can be argued that von Neumann had used Turing’s insight that computing must be primarily an application of logic. Thus, Turing laid the foundations of modern computer science. Turing was able to bridge theory and practice because between 1938$and$1945 he was the chief scientific figure in British cryptography, with particular responsibility for decrypting German naval signals. His main contributions lay in a brilliant logical solution of the Enigma cipher, and in Bayesian information theory.
The advanced electronics employed in British code breaking gave him the experience to become a pioneer of practical computing as well. Turing had less success in postwar computer engineering, and increasingly with drew from attempts to influence the course of computer development. Instead, at Manchester University after 1949 he concentrated on a theory of nonlinear partial differential equations applied to biological development. Like his 1936 work, this opened an entirely new field. It also illustrated his broad mathematical scope, which