# André Weil (1906–1998)

VI.93.   André Weil                                                                                                  819

Further Reading                                               generally, to any reasonable extension of them (such as
                                                              the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory).
Aspray, W. 1990. John von Neumann and the Origins of
  Modern Computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                    Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem represented
                                                              another blow to the Hilbert program. Suppose that
                                               Wolfgang Coy   we have a set of axioms T (for example, the Peano
                                                              axioms) that is consistent. Can we prove that it is con-
                                                              sistent? Gödel showed that, if T is consistent, then
VI.92      Kurt Gödel
                                                              the statement “T is consistent” (when encoded as a
b. Brno, Moravia (now Czech Republic), 1906;
d. Princeton, New Jersey, 1978                                statement of number theory) cannot be proved from T .
Logic; relativity theory                                      So “T is consistent” is an explicit example of a true
                                                              but unprovable statement. Again, this applies when T
Born in Brno, Moravia, Gödel did his most important           is the set of Peano axioms, or any reasonable exten-
work at the University of Vienna. In 1940 he emigrated        sion there of (roughly, any extension that allows one
to the United States, where he accepted an appointment        to encode into arithmetic statements about pro vab il-
at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.             ity and the like). As a slogan: “a theory cannot prove its
  Considered the greatest mathematical logician of the        own consistency.”
twentieth century, Gödel is renowned for his proofs of           The axiom of choice became highly controversial
three fundamental results: the semantic completeness          when Ernst Zermelo used it to prove that every set can
of first-order logic [IV.23 §2](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory); the syntactic incom-          be well-ordered, a task that, together with the proof
pleteness of formal number theory [V.15](/part-05/gdels-theorem); and                 of the continuum hypothesis, Hilbert had listed first
the consistency, relative to the axioms of zermelo–           among the problems he posed in 1900 to the Inter-
fraenkel [IV.22 §3.1](/part-04/set-theory) set theory, of the axiom of             national Congress of Mathematicians. In 1938 Gödel
choice [III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice) and the generalized continuum hypoth-          showed that both the axiom of choice and the gen-
esis [IV.22 §5](/part-04/set-theory).                                              eralized continuum hypothesis are consequences of
  Gödel’s completeness theorem (1930) is concerned            another principle (the axiom of construct i bility) that
with the following kind of question: how do we know           holds in a submodel of any model of Zermelo–Fraenkel
that a statement in group theory, for example, that is        set theory. Both are consequently consistent with (not
true in every group is actually provable from the axioms      disprovable from) the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms. Much
of group theory? Gödel showed that in any first-order          later (1963) Paul Cohen showed that both statements
theory (one in which quantifiers are allowed over ele-         are also independent of (not provable from) those
ments but not over subsets), any statement true in all        axioms.
models is indeed provable. In an equivalent form, this           Apart from logic, Gödel also worked in relativity
completeness theorem states that any set of statements        theory, where he established the existence of models
that is consistent (that is, from which no contradiction      of einstein’s field equations [IV.13](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations) that permit time
may be derived) has a model—a structure in which all          travel into the past.
those statements hold.
  Gödel’s incompleteness theorem (1931) sent shock            Further Reading
waves through logic and the philosophy of mathemat-
                                                              Dawson Jr., J. W. 1997. Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work
ics. hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) had set out a program in which all        of Kurt Gödel. Natick, MA: A. K. Peters.
statements (in number theory, for example) should be
derivable from a fixed set of axioms. It was generally                                                 John W. Dawson Jr.
believed that such a program was in principle possible,
until the incompleteness theorem destroyed that hope.         VI.93       André Weil
  Gödel’s idea was to construct a statement S that, in        b. Paris, 1906; d. Princeton, New Jersey, 1998
effect, asserts “S is not provable.” A moment’s thought        Algebraic geometry; number theory
shows that such a statement must be both true and
unprovable. Gödel’s remarkable achievement was to             André Weil was one of the most influential mathemat i-
manage to encode such a statement in the language             cians of the twentieth century. His influence is due
of number theory. His proof applies to such axioms as         both to his original contributions to a remarkably broad
the peano axioms [III.67](/part-03/the-peano-axioms) for number theory, and more         spectrum of mathematical theories, and to the mark

820                                                                                               VI. Mathematicians

he left on mathematical practice and style, through          this problem; but the problem remained open until
some of his own works as well as through the bour-           World War II. Weil’s initial attempt, written while in jail
baki [VI.96](/part-06/nicolas-bourbaki-1935) group, of which he was one of the principal     in Rouen, was very modest, and contained little more
founders.                                                    than Deuring’s observations of 1936. But, after several
   Weil, as well as his sister, the philosopher, political   years of searching in various directions while in resi-
activist, and religious thinker Simone Weil, received an     dence in the United States, Weil finally became the first
excellent education. Both were brilliant students, very      person to prove the analogue of the Riemann hypo the-
widely read, with a keen interest in languages (including    sis for all nonsingular curves. This proof relied on his
Sanskrit). André Weil soon specialized in mathematics,       complete rewriting of algebraic geometry (over an arbi-
his sister in philosophy. He graduated (and was first in      trary ground field), which he had published before in
his year in the agrégation for mathematics) from the         his Foundations of Algebraic Geometry (1946). Further-
École Normale Supérieure (ENS) when he was not even          more, Weil generalized the analogue of the Riemann
nineteen years old, and traveled in Italy and Germany.       hypothesis from curves to algebraic varieties of arbi-
He obtained his doctorate in Paris at the age of twenty-     trary dimensions, defined over a finite field, and added
two, and then went to Aligarh, India, as a professor         a new topological interpretation of the main invariants
for two years. After a brief spell in Marseilles, he was     of the relevant zeta functions. Taken together, all these
Maître de Conférences at Strasbourg University (along        conjectures became known as the weil conjectures
with Henri Cartan) from 1933 to 1939. The idea of the        [V.35](/part-05/the-weil-conjectures); they represented the most important stimulus
Bourbaki project arose there from discussions about          for the further development of algebraic geometry right
teaching with Cartan, and grew in Paris in meetings that     through to the 1970 s, and to some extent later as well.
included other friends from the ENS.                            Several mathematicians were at work in the 1930 s
   His research achievements began with his 1928 Paris       and 1940 s trying to rewrite algebraic geometry. Weil’s
thesis. In it, he generalized mordell’s theorem [V.29](/part-05/rational-points-on-curves-and-vi40-ernst-eduard-kummer-18101893)       Foundations, even though it does contain striking new
of 1922, that the group of rational points on an ellip-      insights (e.g., a novel definition of intersection mul-
tic curve [III.21](/part-03/elliptic-curves) is a finitely generated Abelian group,     tip li city), owes its basic notions (generic points, spe-
to the group of K-rational points (where K is a number       cializations) to van der Waerden, and it exerted its
field [III.63](/part-03/number-fields)) of a Jacobi an variety. During the follow-     influence on the mathematical community in conju nc-
ing twelve years, Weil branched out in various direc-        tion with the (different) rewriting of algebraic geometry
tions, all related to important research topics of the       developed so successfully by Oscar Zariski from 1938
1930 s: the approximation of holomorphic functions            onward. It was therefore to a large extent the charac-
of several variables by polynomials; the conjugation         teristic style, rather than just the “mathematical con-
of maximal tori in compact lie groups [III.48 §1](/part-03/lie-theory); the       tent,” of the Foundations that would create a new way
theory of integration on compact and Abelian topolog-        of doing algebraic geometry for the next twenty years
ical groups; and the definition of uniform topologi-          or so, until it began to be replaced by Grothendieck’s
cal spaces [III.90](/part-03/topological-spaces). But problems of arithmetic origin       language of schemes.
stood out among his interests: further thoughts on his          Later works include, among other seminal papers
thesis and on Siegel’s finiteness theorem for integral        and books, Weil’s “adelic” rewriting of Siegel’s work
points; a bold “vector bundle” version of the riemann–       on quadratic forms, and a crucial contribution to the
roch theorem [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) on a Riemann surface (in parallel        philosophy, due to Taniyama and Shimura, that elliptic
with similar work by E. Witt); p-adic analogs of elliptic    curves over the rational numbers should be modular—
functions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) (with his student Elisabeth Lutz).          the proof of this fact is the basis of Wiles’s 1995 proof
   Starting in 1940, Weil became active on what was          of fermat’s last theorem [V.10](/part-05/fermats-last-theorem).
probably the biggest challenge in arithmetic algebraic          In 1947, Weil—whose evasion of the French draft in
geometry at the time. Helmut Hasse had proved in 1932        1939 was considered very critically by many American
the analogue of the riemann hypothesis [IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory) for         colleagues—finally obtained a professorship at a distin-
curves of genus 1 (elliptic curves) defined over a field       guished university, namely Chicago. In 1958, he moved
with finitely many elements. The problem was to gen-          to Princeton as a permanent member of the Institute
eralize this to algebraic curves of genus higher than 1.     for Advanced Study.
In 1936, Max Deuring had proposed algebraic corre-              The postwar years saw Weil continuously active on
spondences as a crucial new ingredient for attacking         many fronts of mathematical research, contributing