# André Weil (1906–1998)

VI.93. André Weil

Further Reading

Aspray, W. 1990.Modern Computing John von Neumann and the Origins of. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Wolfgang Coy

VI.92 Kurt Gödel

b. Brno, Moravia (now Czech Republic), 1906; d. Princeton, New Jersey, 1978 Logic; relativity theory Born in Brno, Moravia, Gödel did his most important work at the University of Vienna. In 1940 he emigrated to the United States, where he accepted an appointment at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. Considered the greatest mathematical logician of the twentieth century, Gödel is renowned for his proofs of three fundamental results: the semanticof first-order logic [IV.23 §2](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory);
the syntactic completeness incompleteness of formal number theory the consistency, relative to the axioms of zermelo–[V.15](/part-05/gdels-theorem); and fraenkel choice [III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice) and the generalized[IV.22 §3.1](/part-04/set-theory) set theory, of the continuum hypoth-axiom of esis [IV.22 §5](/part-04/set-theory). with the following kind of question: how do we know that a statement in group theory, for example, that is Gödel’s completeness theorem (1930) is concerned true in every group is actually provable from the axioms of group theory?
Gödel showed that in any first-order theory (one in which quantifiers are allowed over ele-ments but not over subsets), any statement true in all models is indeed provable. In an equivalent form, this completeness theorem states that any set of statements that is consistent (that is, from which no contradiction may be derived) has a model—a structure in which all those statements hold.
waves through logic and the philosophy of mathemat-ics. Gödel’s incompleteness theorem (1931) sent shock hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) had set out a program in which all statements (in number theory, for example) should be derivable from a fixed set of axioms. It was generally believed that such a program was in principle possible, until the incompleteness theorem destroyed that hope. effect, asserts “shows that such a statement must be both true and Gödel’s idea was to construct a statement Sis not provable.” A moment’s thought S that, in unprovable.
Gödel’s remarkable achievement was to manage to encode such a statement in the languageof number theory. His proof applies to such axioms as the peano axioms [III.67](/part-03/the-peano-axioms) for number theory, and more

819

generally, to any reasonable extension of them (such asthe Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory). another blow to the Hilbert program. Suppose thatwe have a set of axioms Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem represented T (for example, the Peano axioms) that is consistent. Can we prove that it is consistent? Gödel showed that, ifthe statement “$T$ is consistent” (when encoded as a T is consistent, then statement of number theory) cannot be proved from So “$T$ is consistent” is an explicit example of a true T. but unprovable statement.
Again, this applies whenis the set of Peano axioms, or any reasonable exten-$T$ sion there of (roughly, any extension that allows oneto encode into arithmetic statements about provability and the like). As a slogan: “a theory cannot prove its own consistency.”The axiom of choice became highly controversial when Ernst Zermelo used it to prove that every set canbe well-ordered, a task that, together with the proof of the continuum hypothesis, Hilbert had listed first among the problems he posed in 1900 to the International Congress of Mathematicians.
In 1938 Gödelshowed that both the axiom of choice and the generalized continuum hypothesis are consequences of another principle (the axiom of construct i bility) that holds in a submodel of any model of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Both are consequently consistent with (not disprovable from) the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms.
Much later (1963) Paul Cohen showed that both statements are also independent of (not provable from) those axioms. Apart from logic, Gödel also worked in relativity theory, where he established the existence of models of einstein’s field equations [IV.13](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations) that permit time travel into the past.

Further Reading

Dawson Jr., J. W. 1997.of Kurt Gödel. Natick, MA: A. K. Peters. Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work John W. Dawson Jr. VI.93 André Weil b. Paris, 1906; d. Princeton, New Jersey, 1998 Algebraic geometry; number theory André Weil was one of the most influential mathemat i-cians of the twentieth century. His influence is due both to his original contributions to a remarkably broad spectrum of mathematical theories, and to the mark

820

he left on mathematical practice and style, through some of his own works as well as through the bourbaki [VI.96](/part-06/nicolas-bourbaki-1935) group, of which he was one of the principal founders. Weil, as well as his sister, the philosopher, political activist, and religious thinker Simone Weil, received anexcellent education. Both were brilliant students, very widely read, with a keen interest in languages (including Sanskrit). André Weil soon specialized in mathematics, his sister in philosophy.
He graduated (and was first in his year in theÉcole Normale Supérieure (ENS) when he was not evenagrégation for mathematics) from the nineteen years old, and traveled in Italy and Germany. He obtained his doctorate in Paris at the age of twenty-two, and then went to Aligarh, India, as a professor for two years. After a brief spell in Marseilles, he was Maître de Conférences at Strasbourg University (along with Henri Cartan) from 1933 to 1939.
The idea of the Bourbaki project arose there from discussions about teaching with Cartan, and grew in Paris in meetings that included other friends from the ENS.His research achievements began with his 1928 Paris thesis. In it, he generalized mordell’s theorem [V.29](/part-05/rational-points-on-curves-and-vi40-ernst-eduard-kummer-18101893) of 1922, that the group of rational points on antic curve [III.21](/part-03/elliptic-curves) is a finitely generated Abelian group, ellipto the group of field [III.63](/part-03/number-fields)) of a Jacobi an variety.
During the follow-K-rational points (where K is a number ing twelve years, Weil branched out in various directions, all related to important research topics of the1930 s: the approximation of holomorphic functions of several variables by polynomials; the conjugation of maximal tori in compact lie groups [III.48 §1](/part-03/lie-theory); the theory of integration on compact and Abelian topological groups; and the definition of uniformcal spaces [III.90](/part-03/topological-spaces). But problems of arithmetic origin topologist ood out among his interests:
further thoughts on his thesis and on Siegel’s finiteness theorem for integral points; a bold “vector bundle” version of the riemannroch theorem with similar work by E. Witt);[V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) on a Riemann surface (in parallelp-adic analogs of elliptic functions Starting in 1940, Weil became active on what was[V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) (with his student Elisabeth Lutz). probably the biggest challenge in arithmetic algebraic geometry at the time.
Helmut Hasse had proved in 1932 the analogue of the riemann hypothesis [IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory) for curves of genus 1 (elliptic curves) defined over a field with finitely many elements. The problem was to generalize this to algebraic curves of genus higher than 1. In 1936, Max Deuring had proposed algebraic corre-spondences as a crucial new ingredient for attacking

VI. Mathematicians

this problem; but the problem remained open until World War II. Weil’s initial attempt, written while in jail in Rouen, was very modest, and contained little more than Deuring’s observations of 1936. But, after several years of searching in various directions while in resi-dence in the United States, Weil finally became the first person to prove the analogue of the Riemann hypo the-sis for all nonsingular curves. This proof relied on his complete rewriting of algebraic geometry (over an arbitrary ground field), which he had published before inhis Foundations of Algebraic Geometry (1946).
Further more, Weil generalized the analogue of the riemann hypothesis from curves to algebraic varieties of arbitrary dimensions, defined over a finite field, and added a new topological interpretation of the main invariants of the relevant zeta functions. Taken together, all these conjectures became known as[V.35](/part-05/the-weil-conjectures);
they represented the most important stimulus the weil conjectures for the further development of algebraic geometry right through to the 1970 s, and to some extent later as well. Several mathematicians were at work in the 1930 s and 1940 s trying to rewrite algebraic geometry.
Weil’s Foundations, even though it does contain striking new insights (e.g., a novel definition of intersection multiplicity), owes its basic notions (generic points, spe-cial iz at i ons) to van der Waerden, and it exerted its influence on the mathematical community in conju nc-tion with the (different) rewriting of algebraic geometry developed so successfully by Oscar Zariski from 1938 onward.
It was therefore to a large extent the charac-teristic style, rather than just the “mathematical content,” of theof doing algebraic geometry for the next twenty years Foundations that would create a new way or so, until it began to be replaced by Grothendieck’s language of schemes. Later works include, among other seminal papers and books, Weil’s “adelic” rewriting of Siegel’s workon quadratic forms, and a crucial contribution to the philosophy, due to Taniyama and Shimura, that elliptic curves over the rational numbers should be modular—the proof of this fact is the basis of Wiles’s 1995
proof of In 1947, Weil—whose evasion of the French draft in fermat’s last theorem [V.10](/part-05/fermats-last-theorem). 1939 was considered very critically by many American colleagues—finally obtained a professorship at a distin - guished university, namely Chicago. In 1958, he moved to Princeton as a permanent member of the institute for Advanced Study. many fronts of mathematical research, contributing The postwar years saw Weil continuously active on