# Arthur Cayley (1821–1895)

772

VI.46 Arthur Cayley

b. Richmond, England, 1821; d. Cambridge, England, 1895 Algebra; geometry; mathematical astronomy At the beginning of his career in the 1840 s, Cayley laid down subjects that informed much of his later research. The novelties of his very first undergraduate paper, “On a theorem in the geometry of position”(1841), are the now-standard notation for determinants the introduction of the[III.15](/part-03/determinants) of arrays set between vertical lines and Cayley–Menger determinant.
Following hamilton’s [VI.37](/part-06/william-rowan-hamilton-18051865) discovery of the quaternions three-dimensional space via the succinctly expressed[III.76](/part-03/quaternions-octonions-and-normed-iv25-probabilistic-models-of-critical-phenomena) (1843), Cayley expressed rotations in mappingx \to  q-1 xq, a result that led him to the Cayley–Klein parameters tive system of the octaves (.
He outlined the nonassocia-cayley numbers [III.76](/part-03/quaternions-octonions-and-normed-iv25-probabilistic-models-of-critical-phenomena)), the intersection of curves (the Cayley–Bacharach theorem papers, he described a theory of multilinear determi-), and a dual curve called the Cayleyan. In major nants andnite products. In concert with George Salmon he investi-elliptic functions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) as doubly infigated the famous twenty-seven lines that lie in a cubic surface.
The most important studies among his juvenilia, though, were his first steps in invariant theory(1845, 1846), the field in which his reputation was made. fied London barrister, Cayley broadened his range, but Between 1849 and 1863, years spent as a qualiunlike other gentlemen of science who roamed acrossa multitude of subjects, he restricted his activity exclusively to mathematics. This was mostly pure mathe-matics.
He generalized permutation groups [III.68](/part-03/permutation-groups) using the calculus of operations as a basis, and hesaw that not only were matrices useful as a notational device, but they also constituted a study in their ownright. Not generally an excitable person, at the point of discovery he declared theas “very remarkable” and generations of mathemati-Cayley–Hamilton theorem cians have shared his delight. Matrix algebra was usedin his solution of the Cayley–Hermite problem, which required a description of those linear transformations that leave a bilinear form invariant.
A special case of the solution gives rise to the$(I - T )(I + T )-1$. The links between quaternions, matri-Cayley orthogonal transform ces, and group theory that he observed in the 1850 sare indicative of his concern for the organization of mathematics.

VI. Mathematicians

oirs on In the 1850 s, Cayley set in motion his famous mem-quantics, a term he coined for algebraic forms, now referred to as multilinear homogeneous algebraic forms. He discovered Cayley’s formula for the general form of covariants of binary forms and counting them. In the Sixth Memoir (1859), he demon-Cayley’s law for strated thatof projective geometry euclidean geometry[I.3 §6.7](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) rather than the con-[I.3 §6.2](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) was part verse.
The idea of a projective metric (lute) was seen by klein [VI.57] in the 1870 s as the Cayley’s ab so unifying conceptual idea for classifying non-euclidean geometries. of the For twenty-five years, from 1858, he was the editor Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society tic planetary motion, calculatory work that demanded. In astronomy he contributed to the theory of ellipan assiduous attention to detail.
His work on the lunar theory was noteworthy, and in one long calculation he helped to settle an Anglo-French controversy by veri-fying the correct value for the secular acceleration of the Moon, which had been established by John Couch Adams in 1853. Cayley returned to the academic world in 1863 as the founding Sadleirian Professor of Pure Mathemat-ics at Cambridge. In 1868 Paul Gordan startled invariant theorists by proving that invariants and covariants of a binary quantic could be expressed in terms of a finiteley’s but, undaunted, he completed his series with a list-basis.
This contradicted an earlier result of Caying of the irreducible invariants and covariants of thebinary form of order 5 (the binary quintic), and their connecting syzygies. Many developments in pure mathematics can be traced back to his minor notes of the 1870 s and 1880 s, including the theory of knots, fractals, dynamic programming, and group theory (the well-knownley’s theorem). In graph theory, the number of dis-Caytinct labeled trees withn nodes being (nn)-2 is known as Cayley’s graph theorem.
He brought his theoretical knowledge of graphical trees to bear on the prob-lem of counting isomers in organic chemistry, thus prompting questions about the actual existence of cer-tain chemical compounds that have since been discovered in many instances by chemists. In the last decade of his life, Cayley set about the task that gavehim an important line of contact with today’s mathematicians: the publication of hisical Papers in thirteen large volumes by Cambridge Collected Mathemat University Press.