# Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi (1804–1851)

762

Further Reading

Del Centina, A. 2006. Abel’s surviving manuscripts includ-ing one recently found in London. Historia Mathematica Holmboe, B., ed. 1839.33:224–33.Abel, two volumes. (Second edn.: 1881, edited by L. SylowŒuvres Complètes de Niels Henrik Ore, O. 1957.and S. Lie. Christiania: Grøndahl & Søn.)nary. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. Niels Henrik Abel: Mathematician Extraordi Stubhaug, A. 1996.(Reprinted, 1974. New York: Chelsea.)Hans Tid. Oslo: Aschehoug. (English translation: 2000, Et Foranskutt Lyn: Niels Henrik Abel Og Niels Henrik Abel and His Times:
Called Too Soon by Flames Afar, translated by R. H. Daly. New York: Springer.) Peter M. Neumann VI.34 János Bolyai b. Klausenburg, Transylvania, Hungary (now Cluj, Romania), 1802; d. Marosvásárhely, Hungary (now Tirgu-Mures, Romania), 1860 Non-Euclidean geometry János Bolyai’s father Farkas Bolyai taught him mathe-matics at home, using the first six books of euclid’s [VI.2](/part-06/euclid-ca)1818 and 1823 János studied at the Royal Engineer-Elements and euler’s [VI.19](/part-06/leonhard-euler-17071783) Algebra.
Between ing Academy in Vienna, and then served as an engi-neer in the Austrian Army for ten years, before retiring on a pension as a semi-in valid. Probably inspiredby his father’s attempts to prove the parallel postulate, a key assumption in Euclidean geometry, but very much against the advice of his father, János also attempted to prove it. But in 1820 he switched direction and attempted to show that there could be a geom-etry independent of the parallel postulate.
By 1823 he believed he had succeeded, and after much subsequent discussion father and son agreed to publish the son’s ideas as a twenty-eight-page appendix to his father’stwo-volume work on geometry in 1832. of parallels, according to which, given a line in a plane In this appendix, Bolyai started from a new definition and a point not on the line, there are many lines through the point that do not meet the given line. Of these lines, there are two that are asymptotic to the given line (one in each direction), and Bolyai called these the parallels to the given line through the given point.
Hewent on to derive many results that follow from this assumption in the geometry of two and three dimen-sions, and gave formulas for the new trigonometry of triangles. He showed that these formulas reduce to the familiar formulas of plane Euclidean geometry when

VI. Mathematicians

the triangles are very small. He also found a surface inhis three-dimensional geometry in which geometry is Euclidean. He concluded that there were logically two geometries and that it remained undecided which one corresponded to reality. He also showed that in his new geometry it was possible to construct a square equal inarea to a given circle, thus accomplishing a feat that was widely (and, as was later shown, correctly) believed to be impossible in Euclidean geometry. A copy of the book was sent to gauss [VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855), who eventually replied on March 6,
1832, that he could not praise the work, for “to praise it, would be to praise myself,” going on to claim that the methods and results in the appendix agreed with his own work over the pre-vious thirty-five years, although he was “very glad that it was just the son of my old friend, who takes the precedence of me in such a remarkable manner.” this endorsement of the validity of János’s ideas pleased the father but infuriated the son, and soured rela-tions between father and son for several years.
They did eventually resume an uncomfortable relationship, which persisted until Farkas’s death in 1856. discovery was not appreciated in his lifetime. Indeed, János Bolyai published virtually nothing else, and his it is unclear that anyone but Gauss ever read it, but specific comments about it that Gauss left behind led mathematicians back to it, and it was translated into French by Hoüel in 1867 and into English in 1896 (reprinted in 1912 and 2004).

Further Reading

Gray, J. J. 2004.the Nature of Space János Bolyai, Non-Euclidean Geometry and. Cambridge, MA: Burndy Library, MIT Press.

Jeremy Gray

VI.35 Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi

b. Potsdam, Germany, 1804; d. Berlin, 1851 Theory of functions; number theory; algebra; differential equations; calculus of variations; analytical mechanics; perturbation theory; history of mathematics Jacobi grew up as Jacques Simon Jacobi in a wealthy and well-educated Jewish family. He was baptized dur-ing his first year at the University of Berlin in 1821, probably in order to make it possible for him to follow an academic career at a time when Jews were ineligible for academic positions. Jacobi studied classics under the famous philologist Boeckh and philosophy under Hegel.
Owing to the mediocrity of the mathematics

VI.35. Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi

staff in Berlin at that time, he was self-taught inthe discipline, which soon became his favorite. He read euler [VI.19](/part-06/leonhard-euler-17071783), lagrange [VI.22](/part-06/joseph-louis-lagrange-17361813), laplace [VI.23](/part-06/pierre-simon-laplace-17491827), gausscians like Pappus and Diophantus. In 1825, Jacobi was[VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855), and, last but not least, Greek mathemat i awarded his doctorate for a thesis, written in Latin, on the theory of functions.
The subsequent disputatio (discussion) included critical comments both on Lagrange’s theory of functions and on his analytical mechanics. The following year Jacobi went to the University of Königsberg, where (in 1829) he got a full pro-fessorship. In 1834, he and the physicist F. E.
Neumann founded the “Königsberg mathematical physics seminar,” which, because of the close connection between research and teaching that it fostered, soon led to Königsberg becoming the most successful and influ-ential educational institution for theoretical physics and mathematics in the German-speaking part of the scientific world. By 1844, when Jacobi left Königsbergbecause of poor health and in order to become a member of the Berlin Academy of Sciences, he was rec-ognized as Germany’s most important mathematician after Gauss.
After seven more fruitful years of researchin Berlin he died unexpectedly from smallpox. mathematics, conceiving mathematical thinking as ameans of developing the human intellect and, indeed, Through out his life Jacobi was an advocate of pure of advancing humanity itself. He published his first paper in 1827: it was devoted to number theory (cubic residues) and was influenced by Gauss’s Disquisitiones arithmeticae higher residues, the division of the circle, quadratic. Further investigations were devoted to forms, and related subjects.
Many of Jacobi’s results in number theory were published in the book Canon arithmeticus divisibility to algebraic numbers by Jacobi and Gauss(1839). The extension of the concept of paved the way for the later algebraic theory of numbers(by kummer [VI.40] and others). ofelliptic functions Jacobi’s “most original achievements” (in the words klein [VI.57]) were his contributions to the theory of[V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem), which developed in competition with ing with legendre abel [VI.33](/part-06/niels-henrik-abel-18021829) between 1827 and 1829.
Start-’s [VI.24](/part-06/adrien-marie-legendre-17521833) work, Jacobi’s approach was analytical and focused on the transformation ofelliptic functions, their properties (like double periodicity), and the introduction of the inverse function. Jacobi’s research on elliptic functions culminated in the book ca rum Fundamenta Nova Theoriae Functionum Ellipti-(1829). Together with Abel he should be viewed as one of the founders of the theory of complex func-

763

tions, which emerged in the second half of the century. In particular, his application of research on elliptic functions to Diophantine equations became important for the development of analytic number theory. Jacobi’s contributions to algebra include investigations into the theory of determinants (the “Jacobi an” functional determinant) and their relation to inverse functions, into quadratic forms (“Sylvester’s law of inertia”), and into the transformation of multiple integrals. Even Jacobi’s work in mathematical physics bears the stamp of “pure mathematics”:
following the analytical tradition of Euler and Lagrange, he presented the foundations of mechanics in an abstract and formal man-ner, paying special attention to the relation between conservation laws space and to the unifying role of variational princi-[IV.12 §4.1](/part-04/analysis) and symmetries of ples.
Jacobi’s achievements in this area, which he devel-oped in close relation to the theory of differential equations and the what is now called the “Jacobi–Poisson theorem,” the calculus of variations [III.94](/part-03/variational-methods), include “principle of the last multiplier,” a theory for inte-grating hamilton’s [VI.37](/part-06/william-rowan-hamilton-18051865) canonical equations of motion Jacobi theory”), and a time-independent formulation of[IV.16 §2.1.3](/part-04/mirror-symmetry) by transformation (“Hamilton the principle of least action (“Jacobi’s principle”).
His approach to these areas and the results he obtained are documented in two comprehensive books based on his lectures: Vorlesungen über Dynamik (1866) and Vorlesungen über Analytische Mechanik until 1996). The former had considerable impact on the(not published development of German mathematical physics in the last third of the nineteenth century.
The latter reveals Jacobi’s criticism of the traditional understanding of mechanical principles (as laws that are firmly based on empirical observation or a priori reasoning) and shows strong parallels with the “conventionalist” viewpoint, which did not become popular in science and philos-ophy until half a century later, when it numbered H. Hertz and Jacobi not only promoted new mathematical devel-poincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) among its adherents. op ments, but also studied the history of mathematics:
he worked on ancient number theory, was the advisor for the historical parts of A. von Humboldt’s great mos (1845–62), and developed detailed plans for the Kos publication of Euler’s works.

Further Reading

Koenigsberger, L. 1904.sch rift zur Feier des hundertsten Wiederkehr seines Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi. Fest Geburtstages. Leipzig: Teubner.

Helmut Pulte