# Charles-Jean de la Vallée Poussin (1866–1962)

792                                                                                                   VI. Mathematicians

this, see operator algebras [IV.15 §1](/part-04/operator-algebras).) The equa-          gence test and a summation method for Fourier series
tions arise in the context of problems of mathematical      (1918).
physics, e.g., in potential theory and in the theory of        In 1911 de la Vallée Poussin was responsible for sug-
oscillations. Fredholm considered himself primarily a       gesting the Belgian Academy prize question that led to
mathematical physicist, and his colleague Mittag-Leffler      Jackson’s and Bernstein’s theorems on the order of the
tried in vain to have him awarded the Nobel Prize for       best approximation of a continuous function by poly-
physics.                                                    nomials. His existence and uniqueness theorem for the
                                                            Chebyshev problem for an over determined system of
VI.67      Charles-Jean de la Vallée Poussin                linear equations (1911) was an important step in lin-
b. Louvain, Belgium, 1866; d. Brussels, 1962                ear programming [III.84](/part-03/the-simplex-algorithm); his interpolation formula
Analytic number theory; analysis                            (1908) was fundamental for sampling theory; and his
                                                            character ization of new classes of quasi-analytic func-
De la Vallée Poussin graduated in engineering (1890)        tions by the rate of decrease of their Fourier coefficients
and mathematics (1891) from the Université Catholique       (1915) was a notable development.
de Louvain, where he went on to teach mathematical             De la Vallée Poussin’s other achievements include
analysis from 1891 until 1951. His lectures formed          determining a uniqueness condition for multipoint
the basis for his renowned Cours d’Analyse Infinitési-       boundary-value problems (1929), which was a sig-
male, which ran to many editions from 1903 to 1959.         nificant result for the study of nonoscillatory solu-
A member of the most famous academies in Europe             tions of linear differential equations; and solving var-
and the United States, with honorary doctorates from        ious problems of the conformal representation of
Paris, Strasbourg, Toronto, and Oslo, he was the first       multiply connected regions (1930–31). In potential
president (1920) of the International Union of Mathe-       theory he extended the concept of capacity to arbi-
maticians (now the International Mathematical Union).       trary bounded sets, proved his extraction theorem for
He was made a baron in 1930.                                bounded sequences of set functions, and, by introduc-
  De la Vallée Poussin’s main achievement was his           ing measure theory into poincaré’s [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) “méthode
proof in 1896 of the prime number theorem [V.26](/part-05/the-prime-number-theorem-and-the-vi34-jnos-bolyai-18021860)            de balayage” (“sweeping-out method”) for the dirich-
(an asymptotic estimate for the distribution of prime       let problem [IV.12 §1](/part-04/analysis), he paved the way for modern
numbers in the integers), first conjectured by gauss         abstract potential theory.
[VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855) in around 1793. (The theorem was also proved
independently by hadamard [VI.65](/part-06/jacques-hadamard-18651963) in the same year,         Further Reading
also using complex function theory.) Shortly afterward,     Butzer, P., J. Mawhin, and P. Vetro, eds. 2000–4. Charles-
de la Vallée Poussin followed his proof with a sharper        Jean de la Vallée Poussin. Collected Works—Oeuvres Sci-
error term (1899), which he extended to prime numbers         entifiques, four volumes. Bruxelles/Palermo: Académie
in an arithmetic progression.                                 Royale de Belgique/Circolo Matematico di Palermo.
  When lebesgue [VI.72](/part-06/henri-lebesgue-18751941) first published his inte-
                                                                                                           Jean Mawhin
gral [III.55](/part-03/measures) in 1902, de la Vallée Poussin immediately
grasped its importance and, using an original approach,
described it in the second edition of his Cours d’Analyse   VI.68      Felix Hausdorff
                                                            b. Breslau, Germany (now Wrocław, Poland), 1868;
(1908). In addition, he introduced the concept of the
                                                            d. Bonn, Germany, 1942
characteristic function of a set (1915), and shortly        Set theory; topology
afterward gave a decomposition theorem for the mea-
sure generated by a continuous function of bounded          Hausdorff studied mathematics at Leipzig, Freiburg,
variation (1916).                                           and Berlin between 1887 and 1891, and then started
  Of particular importance for approximation theory         research in applied mathematics at Leipzig under Hein-
and the summation of series is de la Vallée Poussin’s       rich Bruns. After his habilitation (1895) he taught first
convolution integral (1908), for approximating peri-        at Leipzig and then later at Bonn (1910–13, 1921–35)
odic functions by trigonometric polynomials. His other      and Greifswald (1913–21). He is best known for his
significant results in this field include a lower bound       work in set theory and general topology, his magnum
for the error in the best approximation of a contin-        opus being Grundzüge der Mengenlehre (“Basic fea-
uous function by a polynomial (1910), and a conver-         tures of set theory”). It was published in 1914 and