# Emile Borel (1871–1956)

VI.71. Bertrand Arthur William Russell

VI.70 Emile Borel

b. Saint-Affrique, France, 1871; d. Paris, 1956 Professor of Mathematics: University of Lille (1893–96), École Normale, Paris (1896–1909); Chair of Theory of Functions(specially created for him), Sorbonne, Paris (1909–41); first direct or of the Institut Poincaré (1926) Borel’s thesis of 1894 started with problems fromwithin the classical theory of complex functions.
With a new theory of[VI.54](/part-06/georg-cantor-18451918) set theory and, in particular, a “covering the-measure [III.55](/part-03/measures) based on cantor’s orem” (later misnamed the Heine–Borel theorem), hegave a rationale for neglecting certain infinite sets of singularities. He assigned them “measure zero” and thus extended the domain of regularity of the functions considered.
Borel’s theory of measure, based on operations with infinitely many sets, became widely known through his influential des Fonctions (1898) and was later completed and Leçons sur la Théorie developed into a major tool of analysis by[VI.72](/part-06/henri-lebesgue-18751941). It was, in addition, an important prerequisite lebesgue for the axiomatization of probability by[VI.88](/part-06/andrei-nikolaevich-kolmogorov-19031987). kolmogorov VI.71 Bertrand Arthur William Russell b. Trelleck, Wales, 1872; d. Plas Penrhyn, Wales, 1970 Mathematical logic and set theory;
philosophy of mathematics Russell’s training at Cambridge University in the early 1890 s inspired the part of his long and varied life that relates to mathematics. He divided his Tripos into Part 1 (Mathematics) and Part 2 (Philosophy), and then united these two trainings to seek a general philosophy of mathematics, especially its epistemological founda-tions, with geometry as the first test case (1897).
But over the next few years he changed his philosophical stance, especially when he recognized the significance ofalso discovered in 1900 a group of mathematicians cantor’s [VI.54](/part-06/georg-cantor-18451918) set theory from 1896 onward, and around peano [VI.62](/part-06/giuseppe-peano-18581932) in Turin. Wish ing to raise the level of axiomatization and rigor in mathematics, the fol-lowers of Peano formalized theories as much as possible, including the “mathematical logic” of propositions and predicates with set theory, but they kept mathematical and logical notions separate.
After learning their system and adding to it a logic of relations, Russell decided in 1901 that their distinction of notions was not necessary: all notions lay in that logic. This is the philosophical position that has become known

795

as “logicism,” and Russell wrote a largely nonsym-bolic account of it in The Principles of Mathematics (1903). In an appendix to this book he publicized the work of(but advocated it only for arithmetic and some analy-frege [VI.56](/part-06/gottlob-frege-18481925), who had anticipated logicism sis); Russell read him in detail after forming his own position, which continued to be influenced more by Peano.
detail—a daunting task, made even harder by Rus-sell’s discovery in 1901 that set theory was suscep-Now the job was to expound logicism in Peanesque tible to paradoxes, which would have to be avoided or even solved. He was joined in the effort by his former Cambridge tutor, A. N. Whitehead; eventu-ally three volumes of Principia Mathematica appeared between 1910 and 1913. After the basic logic andset theory, the arithmetic of real numbers and also the arithmetic of transfinite numbers were worked out in detail;
a fourth volume on geometry was dueto be written by Whitehead, but he abandoned it around 1920.The paradoxes were solved by a “theory of types,” which formed a hierarchy of individuals, sets of individuals, sets of sets of individuals, and so on. A set or individual could only be a member of a set immediately above it in the hierarchy; thus, a set could not belongto itself. Comparable restrictions were laid on relations and predicates.
While this avoided the paradoxes, it also ruled out a great deal of good mathematics, since different kinds of numbers lay in different types and so could not be brought together for arithmetic opera-tions: for example, 34+7 was not even definable. The authors proposed the “axiom of reducibility” to allow18 such definitions to be made; but this was, frankly, justa fudge. form ofplicative axiom,” that he had found in 1904, just before Among the various features of Russell’s theory was athe axiom of choice [III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice), called the “multi Ernst Zermelo.
It had a curious role within logicism, partly because its logicist status was suspect. icato be too mathematical for the philosophers and too While there was discussion of, concerning both its logic and its logicism, it tended Principia mathemat philosophical for the mathematicians. However, the program influenced some kinds of philosophy, including Russell’s own;
and as an example of high - level axiomatization it served as a model for foundational studies, including gödel’s incompleteness theorems [V.15](/part - 05/gdels - theorem) of 1931, which showed that logicism as Russell had conceived it could not be achieved.