# Emmy Noether (1882–1935)

800

He then laid the basis for topology of[I.3 §6.9](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), where his basic tool was the Brouwer degree manifolds of continuous mappings. The basic paper is his “Über Abbildungen von mannigfaltigkei ten” (“On mappingsof manifolds,” 1911), which contained most of the tools for the new topology, e.g., simplicial approx i-mation, mapping degree, homotopy [[IV.6 §§2, 3]](/part-04/algebraic-topology), singularity index (in his own terminology), and also the fundamental properties of the new notions. Brouwer’s new topological insights and techniques led him to a wealth of
spectacular results: the brouwer fixed point theorem, the invariance-of-domain theorem, the higher-dimensional Jordan theorem, and the definition of dimension, including the soundness proof (that Rn has dimension n). He also applied his invariance-of-domain theorem to the theory of auto-morphic functions and uniformization, thus proving the correctness of the Klein–Poincaré continuity method (1912).During World War I Brouwer returned to the foundations of mathematics;
he conceived his mature tion i st ic mathematics [II.7 §3.1](/part-02/foundations-crisis), which fully exploit-intuied the potential of constructive mathematics, based on mentally created objects and notions. The key notions were (infinite) choice sequences (i.e., sequences determined by more or less free choices (by the mathemat i-cian) of mathematical objects, say natural numbers), well-orderings, and intuitionistic logic. In “Brouwer’s universe” strong results can be obtained:
the “conti-nuity principle,” for example, which says that a function that assigns natural numbers to choice sequencesis continuous (i.e., the output is determined by a finite piece of the (infinite) input); and certain transfinite induction principles, in particular the novel principleof “bar-induction.” With the help of these principles he showed that (i) all real functions on a closed seg-ment are uniformly continuous and (ii) the continuum is indecomposable (cannot be split). This enabled him to refute the principle of the excluded middle in a strong sense:
it is not the case that each real number is zero or nonzero. In Brouwer’s universe many classical theorems, such as the intermediate value theorem and the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, fail. “principle of the excluded middle,” but instead it had certain strong constructive principles at its disposal, Brouwer’s mathematical universe lacked the logical which turned it into an alternative to the traditional universe, with a comparable strength. with Hilbert (“intuitionism versus formalism”). In 1928 His foundational program brought him into conflict

VI. Mathematicians

matters came to a head and, in an incident famously described by Einstein as “the war of frogs and mice,” Hilbert succeeded in getting Brouwer removed (after fourteen years’ service) from the editorial board of Mathematische Annalen Brouwer was unconventional and had wide-ranging. interests: art, literature, politics, philosophy, mysti-cism. He was a staunch international ist. from 1912 until 1951.He was a professor at the University of Amsterdam

Further Reading

Brouwer, L. E. J. 1975–76.Amsterdam: North-Holland. Collected Works, two volumes. van Dalen, D. 1999–2005.The Life of L. E. J. Brouwer Mystic, Geometer and Intuitionist., two volumes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dirk van Dalen

VI.76 Emmy Noether

b. Erlangen, Germany, 1882; d. Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, 1935 Algebra; mathematical physics; topology Noether began her career with a feat of classical algebra, which she transmuted into the vation theorems [IV.12 §4.1](/part-04/analysis) for physics. She became noether cons era founder of modern abstract algebra and the leader inspreading that algebra all across mathematics. dan were Erlangen mathematicians and favored educat-ing women. Gordan made heroic calculations of invari-Her father Max Noether and family friend Paul Gorants in algebra.
A quadratic polynomial Ax2 + Bx +C. qrt{Bhas} essentially just one invariant, the discriminant2 - 4 ACused in the quadratic formula. As Gordan’s student, Noether found 331 independent invariants of degree-four polynomials in three variables, and proved that all others depend on them. It was impressive, though not, as it turned out, groundbreaking. work on invariants for differential equations in general relativity by reducing them to algebra.
That year she hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) brought her to Göttingen in 1915 to found her conservation theorems, which show that the conserved quantities of a physical system correspond to its symmetries. For example, if a system has laws un-changing with time, so that a time shift is a symmetry of the system, then energy is conserved in the system (Feynman 1965, chapter 4). These theorems became fundamental in Newtonian physics and especially quantum mechanics. They also showed that general rel - ativity admits conservation laws only in special cases.
bra as her life’s work. Instead of classical algebra with Noether saw the creation of general abstract alge-