# Emmy Noether (1882–1935)

$800$

He then laid the basis for topology of manifolds [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), where his basic tool was the Brouwer degree of continuous mappings. The basic paper is his “Über Abbildungen von Mannigfaltigkei ten” (“ On mappings of manifolds,” 1911 ), which contained most of the tools for the new topology, e.g., simplicial approximation, mapping degree, homotopy [IV . 6 § § 2 , 3 ] , singularity index (in his own terminology), and also the fundamental properties of the new notions. Brouwer’s new topological insights and techniques led him to a wealth of spectacular results:
the Brouwer fixed point theorem, the invariance-of-domain theorem, the higher-dimensional Jordan theorem, and the definition of dimension, including the soundness proof (that R n has dimension n) . He also applied his invariance-of-domain theorem to the theory of automorphic functions and uniformization, thus proving the correctness of the Klein-Poincaré continuity method (1912) . During World War I Brouwer returned to the foundations of mathematics;
he conceived his mature intuitionistic mathematics [II.7](/part-02/foundations-crisis), which fully exploited the potential of constructive mathematics, based on mentally created objects and notions. The key notions were (infinite) choice sequences (i . e . , sequences determined by more or less free choices (by the mathematician) of mathematical objects, say natural numbers), well-orderings, and intuitionistic logic. In “Brouwer’s universe” strong results can be obtained:
the “continuity principle,” for example, which says that a function that assigns natural numbers to choice sequences is continuous (i . e . , the output is determined by a finite piece of the (infinite) input); and certain transfinite induction principles, in particular the novel principle of “bar-induction.” With the help of these principles he showed that (i) all real functions on a closed segment are uniformly continuous and (ii) the continuum is indecomposable (cannot be split) . This enabled him to refute the principle of the excluded middle in a strong sense:
it is not the case that each real number is zero or nonzero. In Brouwer’s universe many classical theorems, such as the intermediate value theorem and the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, fail. Brouwer’s mathematical universe lacked the logical “principle of the excluded middle,” but instead it had certain strong constructive principles at its disposal, which turned it into an alternative to the traditional universe, with a comparable strength. His foundational program brought him into conflict with Hilbert (“ intuitionism versus formalism ”). In 1928 VI.
Mathematicians matters came to a head and, in an incident famously described by Einstein as “the war of frogs and mice,” Hilbert succeeded in getting Brouwer removed (after fourteen years’ service) from the editorial board of Mathematische Annalen. Brouwer was unconventional and had wide-ranging interests: art, literature, politics, philosophy, mysticism. He was a staunch internationalist. He was a professor at the University of Amsterdam from 1912 until 1951 . Further Reading Brouwer, $L. E. J. 1975 - 76$ . Collected Works, two volumes. Amsterdam: North-Holland. van Dalen, $D.1999 - 2005$ .
Mystic, Geometer and Intuitionist. The Life of L. E. J. Brouwer, two volumes. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Dirk van Dalen $VI$ . $76$ Emmy Noether b. Erlangen, Germany, 1882 ;  d. Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, 1935 Algebra; mathematical physics; topology Noether began her career with a feat of classical algebra, which she transmuted into the noether conservation theorems [IV.12](/part-04/analysis) for physics. She became a founder of modern abstract algebra and the leader in spreading that algebra all across mathematics.
Her father Max Noether and family friend Paul Gordan were Erlangen mathematicians and favored educating women. Gordan made heroic calculations of invariants in algebra. A quadratic polynomial $Ax^{2} + Bx +$ C has essentially just one invariant, the discriminant √ $B^{2} - 4AC$ used in the quadratic formula. As Gordan’s student, Noether found $331$ independent invariants of degree-four polynomials in three variables, and proved that all others depend on them. It was impressive, though not, as it turned out, groundbreaking.
hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) brought her to Göttingen in 1915 to work on invariants for differential equations in general relativity by reducing them to algebra. That year she found her conservation theorems, which show that the conserved quantities of a physical system correspond to its symmetries. For example, if a system has laws unchanging with time, so that a time shift is a symmetry of the system, then energy is conserved in the system (Feynman 1965 , chapter 4). These theorems became fundamental in Newtonian physics and especially quantum mechanics.
They also showed that general relativity admits conservation laws only in special cases. Noether saw the creation of general abstract algebra as her life’s work. Instead of classical algebra with