# Felix Hausdorff (1868–1942)

792

this, see tions arise in the context of problems of mathematical operator algebras [IV.15 §1](/part-04/operator-algebras).) The equa physics, e.g., in potential theory and in the theory of oscillations. Fredholm considered himself primarily a mathematical physicist, and his colleague Mittag-Leffler tried in vain to have him awarded the Nobel Prize for physics. VI.67 Charles-Jean de la Vallée Poussin b. Louvain, Belgium, 1866; d. Brussels, 1962 Analytic number theory;
analysis De la Vallée Poussin graduated in engineering (1890) and mathematics (1891) from the Université Catholique de Louvain, where he went on to teach mathematical analysis from 1891 until 1951. His lectures formed the basis for his renowned Cours d’Analyse Infinitésimale A member of the most famous academies in Europe, which ran to many editions from 1903 to 1959.
and the United States, with honorary doctorates from Paris, Strasbourg, Toronto, and Oslo, he was the first president (1920) of the International Union of Mathematicians (now the International Mathematical Union).He was made a baron in 1930. proof in 1896 of the(an asymptotic estimate for the distribution of prime De la Vallée Poussin’s main achievement was his prime number theorem [V.26](/part-05/the-prime-number-theorem-and-the-vi34-jnos-bolyai-18021860) numbers in the integers), first conjectured by[VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855) in around 1793.
(The theorem was also proved gauss independently byalso using complex function theory.) Shortly afterward, hadamard [VI.65](/part-06/jacques-hadamard-18651963) in the same year, de la Vallée Poussin followed his proof with a sharper error term (1899), which he extended to prime numbers in an arithmetic progression. gral grasped its importance and, using an original approach, When[III.55](/part-03/measures) in 1902, de la Vallée Poussin immediately lebesgue [VI.72](/part-06/henri-lebesgue-18751941) first published his in te described it in the second edition of his(1908).
In addition, he introduced the concept of the Cours d’Analyse characteristic function of a set (1915), and shortly afterward gave a decomposition theorem for the measure generated by a continuous function of bounded variation (1916). Of particular importance for approximation theory and the summation of series is de la Vallée Poussin’sc on vol ut i on integral (1908), for approximating periodic functions by trigonometric polynomials.
His other significant results in this field include a lower bound for the error in the best approximation of a contin-uous function by a polynomial (1910), and a conver-

VI. Mathematicians

gence test and a summation method for Fourier series(1918). In 1911 de la Vallée Poussin was responsible for suggesting the Belgian Academy prize question that led to Jackson’s and Bernstein’s theorems on the order of the best approximation of a continuous function by poly-nomials. His existence and uniqueness theorem for the Chebyshev problem for an over determined system of linear equations (1911) was an important step in linear programming [III.84](/part-03/the-simplex-algorithm); his interpolation formula (1908) was fundamental for sampling theory;
and his character ization of new classes of quasi-analytic functions by the rate of decrease of their Fourier coefficients(1915) was a not able development. determining a uniqueness condition for multipoint De la Vallée Poussin’s other achievements include boundary-value problems (1929), which was a sig-nif i cant result for the study of nonoscillatory solutions of linear differential equations; and solving var-ious problems of the conformal representation of multiply connected regions (1930–31).
In potential theory he extended the concept of capacity to arbitrary bounded sets, proved his extraction theorem for bounded sequences of set functions, and, by introducing measure theory intode balayage” (“sweeping-out method”) for thepoincaré’s [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) “méthodedirichlet problem abstract potential theory.[IV.12 §1](/part-04/analysis), he paved the way for modern

Further Reading

Butzer, P., J. Mawhin, and P. Vetro, eds. 2000–4.Jean de la Vallée Poussin. Collected Works—Oeuvres Sci-Charles ent if i qu es Royale de Belgique/Circolo Matematico di Palermo., four volumes. Bruxelles/Palermo: Académie

Jean Mawhin

VI.68 Felix Hausdorff

b. Breslau, Germany (now Wrocław, Poland), 1868; d. Bonn, Germany, 1942 Set theory; topology Hausdorff studied mathematics at Leipzig, Freiburg, and Berlin between 1887 and 1891, and then started research in applied mathematics at Leipzig under Hein-rich Bruns. After his habilitation (1895) he taught first at Leipzig and then later at Bonn (1910–13, 1921–35)and Greifswald (1913–21). He is best known for his work in set theory and general topology, his magnum opus being Grundzüge der Mengenlehre (“Basic features of set theory”). It was published in 1914 and