# Felix Hausdorff (1868–1942)

792                                                                                                   VI. Mathematicians

this, see operator algebras [IV.15 §1](/part-04/operator-algebras).) The equa-          gence test and a summation method for Fourier series
tions arise in the context of problems of mathematical      (1918).
physics, e.g., in potential theory and in the theory of        In 1911 de la Vallée Poussin was responsible for sug-
oscillations. Fredholm considered himself primarily a       gesting the Belgian Academy prize question that led to
mathematical physicist, and his colleague Mittag-Leffler      Jackson’s and Bernstein’s theorems on the order of the
tried in vain to have him awarded the Nobel Prize for       best approximation of a continuous function by poly-
physics.                                                    nomials. His existence and uniqueness theorem for the
                                                            Chebyshev problem for an over determined system of
VI.67      Charles-Jean de la Vallée Poussin                linear equations (1911) was an important step in lin-
b. Louvain, Belgium, 1866; d. Brussels, 1962                ear programming [III.84](/part-03/the-simplex-algorithm); his interpolation formula
Analytic number theory; analysis                            (1908) was fundamental for sampling theory; and his
                                                            character ization of new classes of quasi-analytic func-
De la Vallée Poussin graduated in engineering (1890)        tions by the rate of decrease of their Fourier coefficients
and mathematics (1891) from the Université Catholique       (1915) was a not able development.
de Louvain, where he went on to teach mathematical             De la Vallée Poussin’s other achievements include
analysis from 1891 until 1951. His lectures formed          determining a uniqueness condition for multipoint
the basis for his renowned Cours d’Analyse Infinitési-       boundary-value problems (1929), which was a sig-
male, which ran to many editions from 1903 to 1959.         nif i cant result for the study of nonoscillatory solu-
A member of the most famous academies in Europe             tions of linear differential equations; and solving var-
and the United States, with honorary doctorates from        ious problems of the conformal representation of
Paris, Strasbourg, Toronto, and Oslo, he was the first       multiply connected regions (1930–31). In potential
president (1920) of the International Union of Mathe-       theory he extended the concept of capacity to arbi-
maticians (now the International Mathematical Union).       trary bounded sets, proved his extraction theorem for
He was made a baron in 1930.                                bounded sequences of set functions, and, by intro duc-
  De la Vallée Poussin’s main achievement was his           ing measure theory into poincaré’s [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) “méthode
proof in 1896 of the prime number theorem [V.26](/part-05/the-prime-number-theorem-and-the-vi34-jnos-bolyai-18021860)            de balayage” (“sweeping-out method”) for the dirich-
(an asymptotic estimate for the distribution of prime       let problem [IV.12 §1](/part-04/analysis), he paved the way for modern
numbers in the integers), first conjectured by gauss         abstract potential theory.
[VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855) in around 1793. (The theorem was also proved
independently by hadamard [VI.65](/part-06/jacques-hadamard-18651963) in the same year,         Further Reading
also using complex function theory.) Shortly afterward,     Butzer, P., J. Mawhin, and P. Vetro, eds. 2000–4. Charles-
de la Vallée Poussin followed his proof with a sharper        Jean de la Vallée Poussin. Collected Works—Oeuvres Sci-
error term (1899), which he extended to prime numbers         entifiques, four volumes. Bruxelles/Palermo: Académie
in an arithmetic progression.                                 Royale de Belgique/Circolo Matematico di Palermo.
  When lebesgue [VI.72](/part-06/henri-lebesgue-18751941) first published his inte-
                                                                                                           Jean Mawhin
gral [III.55](/part-03/measures) in 1902, de la Vallée Poussin immediately
grasped its importance and, using an original approach,
described it in the second edition of his Cours d’Analyse   VI.68      Felix Hausdorff
                                                            b. Breslau, Germany (now Wrocław, Poland), 1868;
(1908). In addition, he introduced the concept of the
                                                            d. Bonn, Germany, 1942
characteristic function of a set (1915), and shortly        Set theory; topology
afterward gave a decomposition theorem for the mea-
sure generated by a continuous function of bounded          Hausdorff studied mathematics at Leipzig, Freiburg,
variation (1916).                                           and Berlin between 1887 and 1891, and then started
  Of particular importance for approximation theory         research in applied mathematics at Leipzig under Hein-
and the summation of series is de la Vallée Poussin’s       rich Bruns. After his habilitation (1895) he taught first
convolution integral (1908), for approximating peri-        at Leipzig and then later at Bonn (1910–13, 1921–35)
odic functions by trigonometric polynomials. His other      and Greifswald (1913–21). He is best known for his
significant results in this field include a lower bound       work in set theory and general topology, his magnum
for the error in the best approximation of a contin-        opus being Grundzüge der Mengenlehre (“Basic fea-
uous function by a polynomial (1910), and a conver-         tures of set theory”). It was published in 1914 and

VI.68.   Felix Hausdorff                                                                                             793

had second and third editions in 1927 and 1935.             a lecture course of 1923 and which preceded kol-
The second edition was so heavily revised in content,       mogo rov’s [VI.88](/part-06/andrei-nikolaevich-kolmogorov-19031987) work in this area by about a decade.
however, that it should really be considered a new          He also made important contributions to analysis and
book.                                                       algebra. In algebra, he contributed to lie theory [III.48](/part-03/lie-theory)
  In his early work, Hausdorff concentrated on applied       (via what is now called the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff
mathematics, mainly related to astronomy, in particu-       formula), while in analysis he developed summation
lar the refraction and extinction of light in the atmo-     methods for divergent series and also a generalization
sphere. He had broad intellectual interests and moved       of the Riesz–Fischer theory.
in Nietzschean circles of artists and poets at Leipzig.        Hausdorff’s central goals in using set theory were for
Under the pseudonym Paul Mongré he wrote two long           applications to analytical disciplines such as function
philosophical essays of which the more prominent was        theory. Among his most important contributions in this
“Das Chaos in kosmischer Auslese” (“The chaos in cos-       respect, and of wide-ranging importance, was the con-
mic selection”). Until 1904 he regularly contributed cul-   cept of hausdorff dimension [III.17](/part-03/dimension), which he intro-
tural critical essays to a renowned German intellectual     duced to give a notion of dimension to rather general
review of the time, continuing to contribute, although      sets (such as, for example, fractal-type sets).
less frequently, until 1912. He also published poems           Hausdorff realized that analytical questions of set
and a satirical play.                                       theory were deeply connected to foundational ques-
  Hausdorff took up set theory at the turn of the cen-       tions. In 1916 he (and, independently, P. Alexandroff)
tury and gave his first lecture course on the topic in       showed that any uncountable borel set [III.55](/part-03/measures) in the
                                                            reals actually has the cardinality of the continuum. This
the summer semester of 1901 at Leipzig university.
                                                            was an important development of a strategy proposed
After his turn toward “Cantorianism” (set theory) he
                                                            by Cantor to clarify the continuum. Although this strat-
began deep and innovative research on order struc-
                                                            egy did not finally contribute to the decisive results
tures and their classification. Among the results of his
                                                            by Gödel and Cohen on the continuum hypothesis
early work in set theory are the Hausdorff recursion
                                                            [IV.22 §5](/part-04/set-theory), it led to the development of an extended
formula for exponentiation of cardinals and several
                                                            field of investigation in the border region between set
contributions to the study of order structures (cofi-
                                                            theory and analysis, now dealt with in descriptive
nality, etc.). Although Hausdorff did not pursue active
                                                            set theory [IV.22 §9](/part-04/set-theory). Hausdorff’s second edition of
research in the axiomatic foundation of set theory,
                                                            the Mengenlehre (1927) was the first monograph in
he contributed important insights on transfinite num-
                                                            this field.
bers, in particular a character ization of what are now
                                                               After the rise to power of the Nazi regime, working
known as weakly inaccessible cardinals and his maxi-
                                                            conditions and life in general deteriorated more and
mal chain principle, a form of zorn’s lemma [III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice) that
                                                            more drastically for Hausdorff and others of Jewish ori-
predated the latter and differed from it in formulation
                                                            gin. When Hausdorff, his wife Charlotte, and a sister of
and intention.
                                                            hers were ordered to leave their house for local intern-
  His own contribution to the axiomatic method was
                                                            ment in January 1942, they opted for suicide rather
oriented toward generalizing classical areas of math-
                                                            than suffering further persecution.
ematics and founding them on axiomatic principles
within the framework of set theory. Hausdorff’s move         Further Reading
to use set theory inside mathematics was seminal for
the turn toward modern mathematics in the sense             Brieskorn, E. 1996. Felix Hausdorff zum Gedächtnis. Aspekte
                                                              seines Werkes. Braunschweig: Vieweg.
of the twentieth century, most prominently character-
                                                            Hausdorff, F. 2001. Gesammelte Werke einschließlich der
ized by the bourbaki [VI.96](/part-06/nicolas-bourbaki-1935) group. Best known in
                                                              unter dem Pseudonym Paul Mongré erschienenen philo-
this respect are his axiomatization of general topol-         sophischen und literarischen Schriften, edited by E. Bries-
ogy in terms of axioms for neighborhood systems, first         korn, F. Hirzebruch, W. Purkert, R. Remmert, and E.
published in the Grundzüge (1914), and the study of           Scholz. Berlin: Springer.
the properties of general, or more specialized, topo-       Hausdorff’s voluminous unpublished work (his “Nachlass”)
logical spaces [III.90](/part-03/topological-spaces). Less well-known (it remained         can be found online at www.aic.uni-wuppertal.de/fb7/
unpublished until recently) was Hausdorff’s axiomati-          hausdorff/findbuch.asp.

zation of probability theory, which was presented in                                                  Erhard Scholz