# Ferdinand Georg Frobenius (1849–1917)

VI.58. Ferdinand Georg Frobenius

(1910) and gravitation (1918). Klein was an interna-tional figure who traveled widely, including to the United States and the United Kingdom, and he played a significant role in the first International Congresses of Mathematicians. His many foreign students included several from the United States, e.g., Maxime Bôcher and William Fogg Osgood, and a number of women, notably Grace Chisholm Young and Mary Winston. Klein’s achievements made Göttingen the scientific center of Germany and one of the mathematical cen-ters of the world.
He possessed an outstanding ability to “see” the truth in mathematical statements and to bring mathematical fields together with out feeling the necessity for detailed calculations and justification (which he left to his students and others). He believed strongly in the unity of mathematics.

Further Reading

Frei, G. 1984. Felix Klein (1849–1925), a biographical sketch. In Jahrbuch Überblicke Mathematik, pp. 229–54. Mann Klein, F. 1921–23.heim: bibliographisch es Institut.lungen, three volumes. Berlin: Springer. (Reprinted, 1973.Gesammelte mathematische Abhand Volume 3 contains lists of Klein’s publications, lectures, and dissertations directed by him.) tury Press.. 1979., translated by M. Ackerman. Brookline, MA: Math Sci-Development of Mathematics in the 19 th Cen Rüdiger Thiele VI.58 Ferdinand Georg Frobenius b. Berlin, 1849; d. Berlin, 1917 Analysis; linear algebra; number theory;
theory of groups; character theory After school in Berlin, Frobenius (who suppressed his first name and wrote mainly as G. Frobenius) spent one semester studying mathematics and physics in Göttingen, then returned to Berlin where he studied under kronecker [VI.48](/part-06/leopold-kronecker-18231891), kummer [VI.40], weierstrass sertation (in Latin) supervised by Weierstrass, in 1870,[VI.44](/part-06/karl-weierstrass-18151897), and others. He wrote his doctoral dison infinite series representations of analytic func-tions of one variable.
For four years he worked as a schoolteacher in Berlin before he became Außerordentlicher Professor (associate professor) at Berlin Uni-ver sity. After less than two years, in 1875, he was called to a full professorship at the Eidgenössische Technis-che Hochschule in Zürich, where he remained until

783

1892, when he returned to Berlin as success or tone cker [VI.48](/part-06/leopold-kronecker-18231891). He retired in 1916, and died one year kro later. theory of differential equations. Later he wrote mainly on theta functions, algebra, and number theory. One of His early contributions were to analysis and the his well-known contributions lies across group theory and number theory. Given a polynomial with coefficients in an algebraic number field, one may ask forthe degrees of the irreducible factors that occur when it is reduced modulo a prime ideal.
In particular, onemay ask for the “density” (suitably defined) of the set of prime ideals modulo which a given pattern of irreducible-factor degrees arises. Pursuing ideas of Kro-necker, Frobenius proved that, if the galois group [V.21](/part-05/the-insolubility-of-the-quintic) is the sity is the proportion of elements of the group whose symmetric group [III.68](/part-03/permutation-groups), then that den cycle structure is the pattern of degrees. He conjectured that this should be true whatever the Galois group.
A tool he used for this led to the name “Frobenius automorphism” for the natural generatora \to aq of the Galois group of a finite extension of the field F . The conjecture was proved by N. G. Chebotaryov in 1925 and is now known as the Chebotaryov density theorem, or, some times, the Frobenius–Che bot ary ovq density theorem. Another well-known and important contribution was to the theory of matrices and linear transformations, where Frobenius introduced the minimal polynomial and other invariants (the elementary divisors). theory.
Like Otto Hölder andhe focused for a time on the search for Frobenius is best known for his work in finite group william burnside finite simple[VI.60](/part-06/william-burnside-18521927), groups invention of the theory of[V.7](/part-05/the-classication-of-finite-simple-groups). His greatest contribution, however, is his group characters [IV.9](/part-04/representation-theory). This emerged unexpectedly in 1896 out of his study of group determinants.
These are the determinants of square matrices with rows and columns indexed by the members of a finite groupx - 1, where the xg are independent variables, one for G, and with (a, b)-entry each element respondence withab g of dedekind G. His interest, stimulated by cor-[VI.50](/part-06/julius-wilhelm-richard-dedekind-18311916), was in how the group determinant factorizes as a polynomial in these variables.
This problem led Frobenius to the discoveryof certain sets of complex numbers, which he called gruppencharacte re the group, that arose as the solutions of sets of linear, one for each conjugacy class in equations connected with the group. Nowadays they are defined differently: for each complex linear repre-sentationρ of the group G (that is, homomorphism