# George Boole (1815–1864)

VI.43. George Boole

linear transformation that takes$x^{2} − · · · − x^{2}$, where p is uniquely determined. Q to (x1)2 + · · · + (xp)2 -p Sylvester surprised the mathematical world in 1864^+1 r and 1865 with the first proof of(Newton had only stated it) for determining bounds onnewton’s [VI.14](/part-06/isaac-newton-16421727) rule the number of positive and negative roots of a polyno-mial equation. However, he then entered a fallow period that ended only with his move to Baltimore.
While there, he returned to invariant theory, and specifically to the problem of inductively determining, for binary forms first of degree 2 then of degree 3 then of degree 4, etc., the number of covariants in a minimum generating set associated with the form. In 1868, Paul Gordanhad proved that this number is always finite and, in so doing, had proved wrong an earlier result of Cayley, who claimed to have shown that a minimum generating set of covariants for the binary quintic form (that is, thebinary form of degree 5) was infinite.
By 1879, Sylvester had explicitly calculated minimum generating sets of covariants associated with binary forms of degrees two through ten. He had also succeeded in recognizing and filling (1878) a critical gap in the proof that Cayley had given of a theorem on the maximal number of linearly independent covariants associated with a binary form of any given degree. Sylvester was the founding editor of the American Journal of Mathematics, and indeed much of this invariant-theoretic work, as well as results on partitions(1882), on rational points on a cubic curve (1879–80), and on matrix algebras
(1884), appeared there.

Further Reading

Parshall, K. H. 1998.in Letters. Oxford: Clarendon. James Joseph Sylvester: Life and Work cian in a Victorian World University Press.. 2006. James Joseph Sylvester: Jewish Mathemati-. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Sylvester, J. J. 1904–12.of James Joseph Sylvester The Collected Mathematical Papers, four volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Reprint edition published in1973. New York: Chelsea.)

Karen Hunger Parshall

VI.43 George Boole

b. Lincoln, England, 1815; d. Cork, Republic of Ireland, 1864 Boolean algebra; logic; operator theory; differential equations; difference equations Boole, who never attended secondary school, college, or university, was almost entirely self-taught. His father

769

was a poor shoemaker who was more interested inbuilding telescopes and scientific instruments than making shoes—the result being that his business failed and Boole had to leave school at the age of fourteen and take a job as a junior teacher to support his parents, sister, and two brothers. By the age of ten he had mastered Latin and Ancient Greek, and by the age of sixteen he could read and speak French, Italian, Span-ish, and German fluently. From his father he got a love of mechanics, physics, geometry, and astronomy, and together they built functioning scientific instruments.
Boole then turned to mathematics and by the age oftwenty he was publishing original research in calculus and linear systems. He wrote two seminal papers on linear transformations (1841, 1843), which provided the starting point for invariant theory, but he left it to others such asto develop the subject. In 1844 he was awarded thecayley [VI.46](/part-06/arthur-cayley-18211895) and sylvester [VI.42](/part-06/james-joseph-sylvester-18141897) Royal Society’s Gold Medal for his paper on operators in analysis, the first gold medal for mathemat-ics to be presented by the society.
The paper was important not only because it contained (arguably forthe first time) a clear definition of the concept of an operator [III.50](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties), but also because of the influence it had on Boole’s subsequent ideas. An operator, for Boole, was an operation of the calculus, such as differentiation (which he denoted by D), considered as anobject in its own right. There was an explicit similarity between the laws he derived for functions of D and the laws of his algebra of logic, which we shall discuss below. man but family circumstances prevented this.
 His rev-erence for creation made him interested in the work-At one time Boole had hoped to become a clergyings of the human mind, which he regarded as God’sgreatest accomplishment. He longed, as Aristotle and leibniz brain processes information and to express this infor-[VI.15](/part-06/gottfried-wilhelm-leibniz-16461716) had before him, to explain how the mation in mathematical form.
In 1847 he published a book entitled which he took the first steps toward achieving his A Mathematical Analysis of Logic in goal, but the book did not have a wide circulation and so made very little impact on the mathematical world. matics at Queen’s College, Cork. It was there that herewrote and expanded his ideas in a book entitled In 1849 Boole was appointed Professor of Mathe-An Investigation of the Laws of Thoughthe introduced a new type of algebra, an algebra of(1854), in which logic, which evolved into what we now call Boolean