# Georg Cantor (1845–1918)

778

and culminated in the following statement by Lie in1893: “I am no pupil of Klein’s, nor is the reverse the case, although this would be nearer to the truth.”)Lie returned (after his first trip abroad) to Oslo and, in 1872, a chair of mathematics at the university was created especially for him. During the early1870 s Lie worked on turning his line–sphere transformation into a general theory of contact transforma-tions. From 1873 he worked on a systematic study of continuous transformation groups (today known asgroups [III.48 §1](/part-03/lie-theory)), his aim being to classify lie alge-lie brastion of differential equations. He also published studies [[III.48 §§2, 3]](/part-03/lie-theory) and apply the results to the soluonthere was no scientific milieu, and he felt very isolated.minimal surfaces [III.94 §3.1](/part-03/variational-methods). In Norway, however, In 1884 Klein and his friend Adolf Mayer in Leipzig tried to help him by sending their student Friedrich Engel to study with him and to help him with the for-mulation and writing of his new ideas. The work that Engel and Lie started together resulted in three vol-umes, Theorie der transformations gruppen (1888–93). In 1886 Lie accepted the professorship in Leipzig (in succession to Klein, who had moved to Göttingen). In Leipzig he became a leading mathematician and a cen-tral figure in the European community of mathematicians. Promising new students from both France andthe United States were sent to study with him. Besides teaching he continued his research on transformation groups and differential equations, and he solved the so-called Helmholtz space problem (characterizing the geometry of space in terms of groups of transformations). In 1898, the year before he died, Lie returned to Oslo to take up a position created especially for him. tiated and developed in the study of differential equa-tions, has grown into a field of its own, the theory of Lie The theory of transformation groups, which Lie inigroups and Lie algebras, which today permeates large parts of mathematics and mathematical physics.

Further Reading

Borel, A. 2001.Algebraic Groups Essays in the History of Lie Groups and. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Hawkins, T. 2000.Society.New York: Springer.Emergence of the Theory of Lie Groups. Laudal, O. A., and B. Jahrien, eds. 1994.Lie Memorial Conference. Oslo: Scandinavian University Proceedings, Sophus Stubhaug, A. 2002.Press.Springer. The Mathematician Sophus Lie. Berlin:

Arild Stubhaug

VI. Mathematicians

VI.54 Georg Cantor

b. Saint Petersburg, Russia, 1845; d. Halle, Germany, 1918 Set theory; transfinite numbers; the continuum hypothesis Although born in Russia, Cantor was raised and educated in Prussia and spent his entire career as pro-fessor of mathematics at the University of Halle. He studied at the Universities of Berlin and Göttingen with kronecker[VI.44](/part-06/karl-weierstrass-18151897), and received his Ph.D. from the University of[VI.48](/part-06/leopold-kronecker-18231891), kummer [VI.40], and weierstrass Berlin in 1867. His dissertation, “De aequationibus secundi gradus indeterminatis” (“On indeterminate equations of the second grade”), dealt with work in number theory on Diophantine equations, work that had been pioneered byand legendre [VI.24](/part-06/adrien-marie-legendre-17521833). The following year he accepted lagrange [VI.22](/part-06/joseph-louis-lagrange-17361813), gauss [VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855), a position in the mathematics department at the University of Halle, where he spent the rest of his aca-demic career. There, his habilitationssc hrift was again devoted to number theory, and dealt with transformations of ternary quadratic forms. was working on difficult problems involving trigono-metric series, and he interested Cantor in the problem It was at Halle that Cantor’s colleague, Eduard Heine, of determining the conditions under which a trigono-metric series of the form f (x) =1 2 a0 +n\infty=1(an \sin  nx + bn \cos  nx) uniquely represented a given function. In other words, could it be that two different trigonometric series could represent the same function? Heine had shown, in 1870, that iff (x) is continuous in general (i.e., for all but a finite number of points of discontinuity, at which points Heine added that the function need not necessarily be finite), the representation is unique if we insist that the series is uniformly convergent toeral. Cantor was able to establish much more generalf in gen- results, and in five papers written between 1870 and 1872 he was able to show that such representations were unique even if an infinite number of exceptional points were allowed, so long as these exceptional points (i.e., points at which the function failed to be continu-ous) were distributed over the domain of the function’s definition in a particular way, constituting what Cantor called “point sets of the first species.” His studies ofthese and related point sets eventually led Cantor to his much more abstract and powerful theory of sets and transfinite numbers.

VI.54. Georg Cantor

given its sequence ofof a set Point sets of the first species were sets P is the set of all the limit points ofderived sets (the derived set P for which, P ), there P^ was some finiten such that the nth derived set Pn of Pempty, i.e., was finite, and thus the$(P^{n})^{+1} = ∅$. It was Cantor’s subsequent study(n + 1)\text{st derived set was} of infinite linear point sets that would eventually lead tohis creation of transfinite set theory in the 1880 s. (For more details about this, see Before he did so, Cantor first began to explore theset theory [IV.22 §2](/part-04/set-theory).) implications of his work on trigonometric series andthe structure of the real numbers in several papers, one of which was to revolutionize mathematics in a fundamental way. The first of these papers was pub-lished in 1874, and bore the innocuous title “Über eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriffes aller reellen algebraischen Zahlen” (“On a property of the collection of all real algebraic numbers”). In this paper, Cantor proved that the set of all algebraic real numbers wasnite [III.11](/part-03/countable-and-uncountable-sets). What was revolutionary about the paper, countably infihowever, was that he also proved that the set of all real numbers was not countable, and must be of a higher order of infinity than the countably infinite set of natural numbers. He returned to this result in 1891 witha new approach, the groundbreaking method of diagonalization, to prove in a very direct way that the set ofreal numbers is uncountably infinite. Cantor’s second important paper of the decade appeared in 1878, “Ein Beitrag zur mannigfaltigkei tslehre” (“A contribution tothe theory of aggregates”), \text{in which he proved} (\text{with a partly faulty argument}) \text{the invariance of dimension}, \text{a theorem first correctly proved by brouwer} [VI.75](/part - 06/luitzen - egbertus - jan - brouwer - 18811966) in 1911. \text{designed to outline the basic elements of his new think}-\text{ing about sets}. \text{He first considered what happened if a Between} 1879 and 1884 \text{Cantor published six papers set were not of the first species by introducing sym}-\text{bols for the infinite indices needed to identify such sets}. \text{For example}, \text{a setond species if there was no finite} P \text{was said to be of then such that the nsec}-\text{th derived set Pn of Pwas finite}. \text{He then considered the case in which the intersection of all the derived sets of} P (namely P^, P^ , . . . , Pn, . . .) was again an infinite set, which he designated had a derived set as well, P \infty. This set, since it was infinite,$P^$\infty$+1$, and this led in fact to an entire sequence of derived sets of the second species:$P \i\text{nf ty}$, P$\i\text{nf ty}$+1, $. . . , P^$\infty$+n$, . . . , P2 \i\text{nf ty}, . . . . In his first papers on infinite linear sets, these indices for derived sets remained “infinitary symbols”: that is, devices for distinguishing between different sets. But

779

in hislehre (“Foundations of a general set theory”), published Grundlagen einer allgemeinen mannigfaltigkei tsin 1883, these symbols became the first transfinite numbers: the transfinite ordinal numbers. These numbers began with re sent ing the sequence of natural numbers 1ω, the transfinite ordinal number rep-, 2, 3, . . . , which could also be thought of as the first infinite ordinal number after all of the finite whole numbers. In the Grundlagen, Cantor not only devised the basic features of a transfinite arithmetic for these numbers, but he provided a detailed philosophical defense of the new numbers. Acknowledging the revolutionary nature of what he was introducing, he argued that the new concepts were necessary in order to achieve precise mathematical results that he could obtain by noother means. ever, the transfinite cardinal numbers, which he de-noted using the Hebrew letter aleph, were introduced Cantor’s best-known mathematical creation, howonly later, in the 1890 s. They were first given full expo-sition in a pair of papers (1895, 1897) that constituted his “Beiträge zur Begrundung der transfiniten Mengen-lehre” (“Contributions to the founding of transfinite set theory”). In two articles published in Mathematische annalen ordinal and cardinal numbers, as well as their arith-, he not only set out his theory of transfinite metics, but also explained his theory of order types, namely the different properties exhibited by the sets of natural, rational, and real numbers considered in their natural orders. There he also stated (but could notprove) his famous continuum hypothesis [IV.22 §5](/part-04/set-theory), namely that the power (or cardinal number) of the con-tinuum of all real numbers R is the next largest infinite set (or cardinal number) after the countably infi-nite set of natural numbers N, the cardinality of which was taken to be hypothesis algebraically as the statement that 2א0. \text{Cantor expressed the continuum}א0 = א . orary degrees from foreign universities and the Cop-ley Medal of the Royal Society for his great contribu-By the end of his career Cantor had received hon-1 tions to mathematics, but there were problems withset theory that were beyond his capacities to remedy. The most disturbing for many mathematicians were the“antinomies” of set theory: the paradoxes put forward by the likes of Burali-Forti andthe former published the paradox arising from the col-russell [VI.71](/part-06/bertrand-arthur-william-russell-18721970). In 1897 lection ofwhich should be an ordinal number greater than any inall ordinal numbers, the ordinal number of the collection of all ordinal numbers. In 1901 the lat - ter discovered the paradox of the class of all classes
