# George Birkhoff (1884–1944)

$802$

and sufficient condition for a subset of R n to be a continuous image of an interval. Using the continuum hypothesis [IV.22](/part-04/set-theory) ( א1 =2א0) , he constructed an uncountable set [III.11](/part-03/countable-and-uncountable-sets) of reals, now known as a Sierpiński set, such that every uncountable subset of it is nonmeasurable ( 1924 ); and also a one-to-one mapping of the line into itself that maps sets of measure zero [III.55](/part-03/measures) to sets of first category, in such a way that every set of the first category is obtained ( 1934 ).
The former result is highly paradoxical (there is no explicit example of a nonmeasurable set); the latter has led, thanks to Erdős, to the following duality principle. Let P be any proposition involving solely the notions of measure zero, first category, and pure set theory. Let P ∗ be the proposition obtained from P by interchanging the terms “set of measure zero” and “set of first category.” Then P and P ∗ are equivalent, assuming the continuum hypothesis. Sierpiński wrote a monograph devoted to the continuum hypothesis in 1934 , entitled Hypothèse du Continu.
Together with tarski [VI.87](/part-06/alfred-tarski-19011983) he introduced the notion of strongly inaccessible cardinals [IV.22](/part-04/set-theory) ( 1930) , meaning cardinals m that cannot be obtained as products of fewer than m cardinals less than m . He also worked in Ramsey theory, giving a limitation on infinite extensions to Ramsey’s theorem. To be precise, Ramsey had proved that, whenever one finitely colors the pairs from the natural numbers, there is an infinite monochromatic subset (i . e . , a subset all of whose pairs have the same color);
Sierpiński showed that, by contrast, one can $2$ - color the pairs from a ground set of size א 1 in such a way that there is no monochromatic subset of size א 1 . He also deduced the axiom of choice from the generalized continuum hypothesis (formulated with out cardinals in 1947 ) . In his old age he returned to number theory and became the editor of Acta Arithmetica (1958-69). Further Reading Sierpiński, $W. 1974 - 76$ . Oeuvres Choisies. Warsaw: Polish Scientific. Andrzej Schinzel $VI$ . $78$ George Birkhoff b. Oversiel, Michigan, 1884 ;  d.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1944 Difference equations; differential equations; dynamical systems; ergodic theory; relativity theory At the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1924 the Russian mathematician A. N. Krylov described VI. Mathematicians Birkhoff as “the poincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) of America.” It was an apt description and one that Birkhoff would have relished, for he was deeply influenced by Poincaré’s work, in particular his great treatise on celestial mechanics. Birkhoff studied first at Chicago under E. H.
Moore and Oskar Bolza, and then at Harvard under W. F. Osgood and Maxime Bôcher. Returning to Chicago, he was awarded his doctorate in 1907 for a thesis on asymptotic expansions, boundary-value problems, and Sturm-Liouville theory. In 1909 , after two years at Wisconsin under E. B. Van Vleck, he went to Princeton, where he formed a close association with Oswald Veblen. In 1912 he moved to Harvard and remained there, in professorial positions, until his sudden death in 1944 .
Birkhoff was steadfast in his support for the development of American mathematics, supervising forty-five doctoral students, including Marston Morse and Marshall Stone, and holding many distinguished positions within the scientific community. He was generally recognized, both at home and abroad, as the leading American mathematician of his generation. Birkhoff first came to prominence with a memoir on the theory of linear difference equations ( 1911 ), and he continued to publish on the topic intermittently through out his career.
Related to this work were several papers on the theory of linear differential equations and a paper on the generalized Riemann problem ( 1913 ), which concerns complex functions defined by differential equations. (Until recently it was believed that the latter paper included a solution to Hilbert’s twenty-first problem, the Hilbert-Riemann problem, but in 1989 Bolibruch proved this belief to be mistaken .) Through out his life Birkhoff’s deepest interest in analysis lay in dynamical systems [IV.14](/part-04/dynamics) and it was here that he enjoyed his greatest success.
His overarching aim was to obtain a reduction of the most general dynamical system to a normal form from which a complete qualitative character ization could be deduced. As with Poincaré, the study of periodic motions was central to his work, and he wrote extensively on the three-body problem [V.33](/part-05/the-three-body-problem) as well as on questions connected with stability. Of his memoir on dynamical systems with two degrees of freedom ( 1917 ), which won the Bôcher prize in 1923 , he is said to have remarked that it was as good a piece of work as he was ever likely to do.
Another celebrated achievement was his proof of Poincaré’s topological “last geometric theorem,” the publication of which brought him immediate international acclaim ( 1913 ). (The theorem states