# George Birkhoff (1884–1944)

802

and sufficient condition for a subset of Rn to be a continuous image of an interval.Using the continuum hypothesis [IV.22 §5](/part-04/set-theory) (א = 2 reals, \text{now known as a}א0 ), he constructed an Sierpi ́uncountable setnski set, such that every[III.11](/part-03/countable-and-uncountable-sets) of1 uncountable subset of it is nonmeasurable (1924); andalso a one-to-one mapping of the line into itself that maps sets ofgory, in such a way that every set of the first category ismeasure zero [III.55](/part-03/measures) to sets of first ca te obtained (1934). The former result is highly paradoxical(there is no explicit example of a nonmeasurable set); the latter has led, thanks to Erd ̋ity principle. Let P be any proposition involving solelyos, to the following dualthe notions of measure zero, first category, and pureset theory. Let P* be the proposition obtained from P by interchanging the terms “set of measure zero” and“set of first category.” Then P and P$^{*} \text{are equivalent}$, assuming the continuum hypothesis.Sierpi ́nski wrote a monograph devoted to the continuum hypothesis in 1934, entitled Hypothèse du Continu tion of. Together with strongly inaccessible cardinals tarski [VI.87](/part-06/alfred-tarski-19011983) he introduced the no-[IV.22 §6](/part-04/set-theory) (1930), meaning cardinalsas products of fewer than mm cardinals less thanthat cannot be obtainedm. He also worked in Ramsey theory, giving a limitation oninfinite extensions to Ramsey’s theorem. To be precise, Ramsey had proved that, whenever one finitely colorsthe pairs from the natural numbers, there is an infinite monochromatic subset (i.e., a subset all of whose pairs have the same color); Sierpi ́nski showed that, by contrast, one can 2-color the pairs from a ground setof sizeא in such a way that there is no monochro- matic subset of sizeof choice from the generalized continuum hypothesis1א1. He also deduced the axiom (\text{formulated without cardinals in} 1947).In his old age he returned to number theory and became the editor of Acta Arithmetica (1958–69).

Further Reading

Sierpi ́Scientific.nski, W. 1974–76. Oeuvres Choisies. Warsaw: Polish

Andrzej Schinzel

VI.78 George Birkhoff

b. Oversiel, Michigan, 1884; d. Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1944 Difference equations; differential equations; dynamical systems; ergodic theory; relativity theory At the International Congress of Mathematicians in1924 the Russian mathematician A. N. Krylov described

VI. Mathematicians

Birkhoff as “theapt description and one that Birkhoff would have rel-poincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) of America.” It was an ished, for he was deeply influenced by Poincaré’s work, in particular his great treatise on celestial mechanics.Birkhoff studied first at Chicago under E. H. Moore and Oskar Bolza, and then at Harvard under W. F.Osgood and Maxime Bôcher. Returning to Chicago, he was awarded his doctorate in 1907 for a thesis on asymptotic expansions, boundary-value problems, and Sturm–Liouville theory. In 1909, after two years at Wisconsin under E. B. Van Vleck, he went to Prince-ton, where he formed a close association with Oswald Veblen. In 1912 he moved to Harvard and remained there, in professorial positions, until his sudden deathin 1944. Birkhoff was steadfast in his support for the development of American mathematics, supervising forty-five doctoral students, including Marston Morse and Marshall Stone, and holding many distinguished positions within the scientific community. He was gen-erally recognized, both at home and abroad, as the leading American mathematician of his generation.Birkhoff first came to prominence with a memoir on the theory of linear difference equations (1911), and he continued to publish on the topic intermit-tently through out his career. Related to this work were several papers on the theory of linear differen-tial equations and a paper on the generalized Riemann problem (1913), which concerns complex functions defined by differential equations. (Until recentlyit was believed that the latter paper included a solution to Hilbert’s twenty-first problem, the Hilbert–riemann problem, but in 1989 Bolibruch proved this belief to be mistaken.) analysis lay inhere that he enjoyed his greatest success. His over-Through out his life Birkhoff’s deepest interest indynamical systems [IV.14](/part-04/dynamics) and it was arching aim was to obtain a reduction of the most general dynamical system to a normal form from which a complete qualitative character ization couldbe deduced. As with Poincaré, the study of periodic motions was central to his work, and he wrote exten-sively on the three-body problem [V.33](/part-05/the-three-body-problem) as well as on questions connected with stability. Of his memoir on dynamical systems with two degrees of freedom (1917), which won the Bôcher prize in 1923, he is said to have remarked that it was as good a piece of work as he wasever likely to do. Another celebrated achievement was his proof of Poincaré’s topological “last geometric the-orem,” the publication of which brought him immediate international acclaim (1913). (The theorem states
