# Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932)

VI.62. Giuseppe Peano

model we find most convenient. By contrast, his posi-tion on arithmetic was intuitionist. On the question of foundational issues, he was largely critical. although sympathetic to the goals of set theory, he attacked what he perceived as its counter intuitive results. (See the crisis in the foundations of mathematics[II.7 §2.2](/part-02/foundations-crisis) for further discussion.) and brilliant ideas, which frequently connected differ-ent branches of mathematics, but lack of detail often Poincaré’s visionary geometric style led him to new made his work hard to follow.
At times his approach was censured for imprecision; it was in marked contrast to that ofwhose work was rooted in algebra and rigor.hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943), his German counterpart,

Further Reading

Barrow-Green, J. E. 1997.Problem. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society. Poincaré and the Three Body Poincaré, J. H. 1915–56.Poincaré, eleven volumes. Paris: Gauthier Villars. Collected Works: Œuvres de Henri VI.62 Giuseppe Peano b. Spinetta, Italy, 1858; d. Turin, 1932 Analysis; mathematical logic; foundations of mathematics Known above all for his (andsystem for the natural numbers, Peano made impor-dedekind’s [VI.50](/part-06/julius-wilhelm-richard-dedekind-18311916)) axiom tant contributions to analysis, logic, and the axiomati-zation of mathematics.
He was born in Spinetta (Piedmont, Italy) as the son of a peasant, and from 1876 studied at the University of Turin, taking his doctoral degree in 1880. He remained there until his death in1932, becoming full professor in 1895. ing what are generally considered to be his most impor-During the 1880 s Peano worked in analysis, achievtant results.
Particularly noteworthy are the continuous space-filling Peano curve (1890), the notion of content (a precedent of independently bymeasure theory jordan [VI.52](/part-06/camille-jordan-18381922), and his theorems on[III.55](/part-03/measures)) developed the existence of solutions for differential equations ofthe first order (1886, 1890).
The textbook he published in 1884, grale, partly based on lectures by his teacher Angelo Calcolo Differentiale e Principii di Calcolo Inte Genocchi, was noteworthy for its rigor and critical style, and is counted among the very best nineteenth-century treatises. The years 1889–1908 saw Peano dedicating himself intensively to symbolic logic, axiomatization, and pro-ducing the encyclopedic Formulaire de Mathématiques (1895–1908, five volumes). This ambitious assembly of

787

mathematical results, compactly presented in the sym-bols of mathematical logic, was given completely without proofs. This was by no means standard at the time, but it shows what Peano expected from logic: it was supposed to bring precision of language and brevity, but not a greater level of rigor (something that was, by contrast, crucial forwith some colleagues, he founded the journal frege [VI.56](/part-06/gottlob-frege-18481925)).
In 1891, together Rivista di Matematica, gathering around him an important group of followers. Peano was an accessible man, and the way he mingled with students was regarded as “scandalous” in Turin. He was a socialist in politics, and a tolerant universalist in all matters of life and culture. In the late 1890 s Peano became increasingly interested in elaborating auniversal spoken language, “Latino sine flexione”; the last edition of the language. Formulario (1905–8) appeared in this maticians such as Hermann Grassmann, Ernst Schrö-der, and Richard Dedekind;
for example, the 1884 Peano followed closely the work of German ma the textbook defined the real numbers by Dedekind cuts, and in 1888 he published Calcolo Geometrico Secondo l’A us dehn ung sl eh re di H. grassmann appeared (notably in Latin) a first version of the famous. In 1889 there peano axioms which he refined in volume 2 of the[III.67](/part-03/the-peano-axioms) for the set of natural numbers, Formulaire (1898).
It aimed at filling the most significant gap in the foun-dations of mathematics at a time when the arithmetization is no coincidence that other mathematicians (Frege, of analysis had essentially been completed. It Charles S. Peirce, and Dedekind) published similar workin the same decade. Peano’s attempt is better rounded than Peirce’s, but simpler and framed in more familiar terms than those of Frege and Dedekind; because ofthis, it has been more popular.
crossroads of his diverse mathematical contributions, linking naturally his previous research in analysis Peano’s work on the natural numbers was at the with his later work on logical foundations, and beinga necessary prerequisite for the Formulaire project. Actually, simplification, refinement, and translation into logical Arithmetices Principia can be regarded as a language (the “nova methodo” in its title) of Grassmann’shad striven to elaborate a stern deductive structure, Lehrbuch der Arithmetik (1861). Grassmann stressing proofs by mathematical induction and recur-sive definitions.
But curiously, unlike Peano, he did not postulate an axiom of induction; thus, Peano presented the basic assumptions much more clearly, bringing