# Godfrey Harold Hardy (1877–1947)

VI.73. Godfrey Harold Hardy

(1910), contributed to even more general theories ofintegrals, e.g., the theory of Radon (1913). of Lebesgue’s integral to become widely recognized, its significance for applications, especially in the analysis Although it took several decades for the importance of discontinuous and statistical phenomena of nature and in probability theory, could not be ignored in the long run.

Further Reading

Hawkins, T. 1970.gins and Development Lebesgue’s Theory of Integration: Its Ori-. Madison, WI: University of Wiscon Lebesgue, H. 1972–73.sin Press.umes. Geneva: Université de Genève.Œuvres Scientifiques en Cinq Vol Reinhard Siegmund-Schultze VI.73 Godfrey Harold Hardy b. Cranleigh, England, 1877; d. Cambridge, 1947 Number theory; analysis G. H. Hardy was the most influential mathematician in Britain in the twentieth century.
With the exception ofthe years from 1919 to 1931, when he was the Savilian professor of geometry in Oxford, he spent his adult life in Cambridge, where from 1931 until his retirement in 1942 he was the Sadleirian professor of pure math-ematics. He became a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1910 and was awarded a Royal Medal in 1920 and the Sylvester Medal in 1940. He died on the day the Royal Society’s highest honor, the Copley Medal, was to bepresented to him. dard of mathematical analysis was rather low in Britain;
Hardy did much to remedy this situation, not only At the beginning of the twentieth century, the stanthrough his research, but also by publishing A Course of Pure mathematics as “a missionary talking to cannibals,” had a tremen-in 1908. This book, which he wrote dous influence on several generations of mathemat i-cians in the United Kingdom. Unfortunately, Hardy’s love of pure mathematics, and analysis in particular, some what stifled the growth of applied mathematics and algebraic subjects for several decades. wooddred papers:
this partnership is generally considered In 1911 he began a long collaboration with[VI.79](/part-06/john-edensor-littlewood-18851977), with whom he wrote almost one hun-little to have been the most fruitful in the history of mathematics. They worked on convergence and summa bil-ity of series, inequalities, additive number theory

797

[V.27](/part-05/problems-and-results-in-vi36-peter-gustav-lejeune-dirichlet-18051859) (including Waring’s problem and Goldbach’s con-jecture), and Diophantine approximation. Hardy was one of the first to do important work on the proved that the zeta function riemann hypothesis [IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory) when, in 1914, he$ζ(s) = ζ(σ + it) has$ infinitely many zeros on the critical line littlewood [VI.79](/part-06/john-edensor-littlewood-18851977)).
Later, with Littlewood, he proved$σ = {}^{12} (see$ deep extensions of this result. From 1914 to 1919 he collaborated with the largely self-taught Indian genius,[VI.82](/part-06/srinivasa-ramanujan-18871920). They wrote five papers, the most famous ofsrinivasa ramanujan which is about This is a rapidly growing function: p(n), the number of partitions ofp(5) = 7 but n.p(200) = 3 972 999 029 388.
The that is, generating function [[IV.18 §§2.4, 3]](/part - 04/enumerative - and - algebraic - combinatorics) ofp(n)$, f (z) = 1 + n \infty = 1 p(n)zn,$ is equal to 1$/((1 - z)(1 - z2)(1 - z3) · · · )$, sop(n) = 21πi f (z)(zn)+1 dz,Γ

where than 1. In 1918, Hardy and Ramanujan not only gaveΓ is a circle about the origin of radius just less a rapidly convergent asymptotic formula for also showed that, forn large enough, p(n) p(n)could bebut calculated exactly by taking the integer nearest to the sum of the first few terms. In particular, computed from the first five terms.p(200) can be mula for Hardy and Littlewood developed this method into one Hardy and Ramanujan proved their asymptotic for-p(n)with the aid of the “circle method”; later, of the most powerful tools in analytic number theory.
In order to estimate contour integrals like the one above, Hardy and Littlewood found it advisable to break upthe circle of integration in a subtle way. berber Another Hardy–Ramanujan result concerns the num-nω(n). They proved that a “typical” number of distinct prime divisors of a “typical” num-n has about log log sense. In 1940 Erd ̋n distinct prime factors in a certain pre cis eos and Kac sharpened and extended this result by showing that additive number-theoretic functions likeω(n) obey the gaussian law[III.71 §5](/part-03/probability-distributions) of errors:
this gave birth to the important field of probabilistic number theory. cepts and results, including Hardy spaces, Hardy’sin equality, and the Hardy’s name has been attached to several con-hardy–littlewood maximal the[IV.11 §3](/part-04/harmonic-analysis). For 0< p ⩽ . nfty  the Hardy space Hp orem consists of functions analytic in the unit disk that are