# Gottlob Frege (1848–1925)

780

that are not members of themselves: is it a member ofitself or not? (See the crisis in the foundations of mathematics [II.7 §2.1](/part-02/foundations-crisis).) Cantor himself was aware of the contradictions that arose from considering the col-lections of all transfinite ordinal or cardinal numbers, and what their ordinal or cardinal numbers might be.The solution Cantor adopted was to regard such collections as too large, and not really sets at all, but “in consistent aggregates” as he called them. Others, like Zer-melo, began to axiomatize set theory in an effort to exclude the possibility of contradictions. The two most powerful results of the twentieth century to complement Cantor’s work are those of gödel [VI.92](/part-06/kurt-gdel-19061978) (who established the consistency of the continuum hypoth-esis with zermelo–fraenkel set theory [IV.22 §3](/part-04/set-theory)) and Paul Cohen (who determined the independence ofthe continuum hypothesis from Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory), the latter finally establishing the impossibility of proving the continuum hypothesis. truly been revolutionary. Above all, his transfinite settheory for the first time gave mathematicians the Cantor’s legacy for the history of mathematics has means of dealing with concepts of the infinite in acareful and precise way.

Further Reading

Dauben, J. W. 1990.losophy of the Infinite Georg Cantor. His Mathematics and Phi-. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. (First published in 1978 by Harvard University Press.) theory. Inety for History and Philosophy of Mathematics. 2005. Georg Cantor and the battle for transfinite set Kenneth O. May Lectures of the Canadian Soci-, edited by G. Van Brummelen and M. Kinyon, pp. 221–41. New York: Springer. a general set theory” (1883). In Western Mathematics 1640–1940. 2005. Georg Cantor. Paper on the “Foundations of, edited by I. Grattan-Landmark Writings in Tapp, C. 2005.Guinness, pp. 600–12. London: Routledge.torische Aufarbeitung der Korrespondenz zwischen Georg Kardinalität und Kardinäle. Wissenschaft sh is Cantor und katholischen Theologen seiner Zeit Franz Steiner. . Stuttgart: Joseph W. Dauben VI.55 William Kingdon Clifford b. Exeter, England, 1845; d. Madeira, Portugal, 1879 Geometry; complex function theory; popularization of mathematics Clifford went up to Trinity College Cambridge in 1863.He graduated from there in 1867 as 2 nd Wrangler and

VI. Mathematicians

also came second in the more demanding Smith’s prize examination. In 1868 he became a Fellow of Trinity, leaving in 1871 to become the professor of applied mathematics at University College London. He died of tuberculosis in 1879. A versatile mathematician, regarded by many as the best of his generation, Clifford’s favorite field was geometry, over which he ranged widely, proving new results in classical Euclidean geometry as well as in projective and differential geometry. He was the first English mathematician to appreciate the work of riemann [VI.49] on differential geometry, and published a translation of Riemann’s paper “On the hypothe-ses that lie at the foundations of geometry” in 1873. He endorsed Riemann’s fundamental reformulation of geometry, and went even further in speculating that the curvature of physical space might explain the motion of matter. He also made a significant application of thethe first to analyze the complicated topological nature riemann–roch theorem [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem), and was among of a riemann surface [III.79](/part-03/riemann-surfaces) by showing how to dissect any Riemann surface into simple pieces in a stan-dard way. He was the first to study a geometry locally equivalent to plane geometry but topologically distinct(the flat torus, also known today as the Clifford–Klein space form after klein’s [VI.57] later more detailed study of it). In algebra, he invented the biquaternions(these are like quaternions, but have complex numbers as coefficients). Clifford was regarded as a marvelous lecturer until his health broke, and he was a successful popularizer and essay writer. He forcefully adopted the view that geometry was a matter of experience, not a priori truth. He was a friend of T. H. Huxley and was sympathetic tohumanism in philosophy.

Further Reading

Clifford, W. K. 1968.R. Tucker. New York: Chelsea. (First published in 1882.)Mathematical Papers, edited by

Jeremy Gray

VI.56 Gottlob Frege

b. Wismar, Germany, 1848; d. Bad Kleinen, Germany, 1925 Logic; foundations of mathematics; paradox Frege was a precursor of modern logic, in that many of the hallmarks of contemporary logic appear first in his writing. His work has also been singularly influential

VI.56. Gottlob Frege

outside the foundations of mathematics, especially inthe philosophy of language. a Ph.D. under Ernst Schering in 1873. His Ph.D. thesis Frege was trained at Jena and Göttingen, receiving addressed the spatial representation of imaginary ele-ments in geometry, and his 1874 Habilitation essay at Jena worked out some basic details of what we wouldnow call “iteration theory.” Though his early work gave no obvious sign of the revolutionary work to come, with hindsight one can discern a foundational motif running through even the apparently conventional math-ematics of the early work: a conviction that arithmetic was in some way or other logical, and that geometry was fundamentally different and less general because it was grounded in spatial intuition. This is an especially salient concern in some of his areas of early research, such as Plücker’s line geometry and riemann’s [VI.49] complex analysis, where the role of visual represen-tation was a matter of some dispute. Frege sought to resolve the dispute by deriving arithmetic and analy-sis rigorously from logical principles. His motivation was not so much a desire for certainty: rather, heheld that only “gap-free” proofs can reveal a science’s fundamental principles.Among the features of contemporary logic appearing first in Frege’s core logical writings ((1879) and Grundgesetze der Arithmetik Begriffsschrift(volume 1, 1893; volume 2, 1903)) are the following. (i) Inferences are analyzed within a quantified logic of propositions, which extends to relations as wellas to propositions of subject–predicate form. We would today describe Frege’s logical system as ahigher-order predicate calculus. (ii) Forms from syllogistic logic (such as “All As are Bs”) are interpreted as quantified conditionals (“For allx, if x is an A, then xis a B”), in the way that is now so standard as to seem inescapable, presenting implicitly the point that the underlying logical form of a proposition may differ fromits surface grammar. (iii) The syntax of the language is explicitly displayed, and inferences are carried out strictly in accordance with the form of statements by explicitly stated rules. (iv) Rules of inference and axioms are distinguished; the consequence relation and conditionals are distinguished. (v) “Function” is taken as an undefined primitive con-cept. (This was a contentious move. Some math-

781

ematicians of the time, including one of Frege’steachers, Alfred Clebsch, held the concept of function to be too vague to serve as a basic building block.) A sharp distinction is enforced between functions and the things (called objects) that can (vi) Quantifiers can be iterated, making possible thebe arguments of functions. logical representations of distinctions such as that between uniform and pointwise convergence. states the crystalline sharpness of Frege’s logical writ-ing when compared with works with similar aims, such However, any simple catalogue of novelties underas the later russell [VI.71](/part-06/bertrand-arthur-william-russell-18721970). It would be several decades before Principia Mathematica of Whitehead and logicians approached Frege’s standards for exactness and clarity. The notation, however, seemed unwieldy to readers at the time (and since). Here, for example, is the statement “if notq, then every v is F”(¬q =⇒(∀v)F(v))in Frege’s notation: v F(v) q (Here represents negation, v is the universal quantifier, and the long vertical line represents the conditional.) arithmetik on English-language philosophy since its translation Frege also wrote an informal treatise,(1884), which has had a profound influence Grundlagen der in 1950. Its account of number contains the first hint ofthe tension that would collapse the project from within. Frege sets out conditions that a definition of number must satisfy to be counted as “acceptable.” However, when formalized these lead to a contradiction, of a similar type to Russell’s paradox (on the set of all sets thatare not members of themselves). This problem escaped Frege’s notice until Russell alerted him to it in a let - ter of 1903. Frege’s reaction (“arithmetic totters”) has been taken to be an over reaction to the failure of one set of axioms among many possible ones. But in Frege’sview, the problem was not with the specific axioms, but rather that any logically adequate weakening appearedto violate some principle he took to be grounded in the nature of thought. Recently, many logicians who do not share Frege’s often baroque - seeming metaphysics of concepts have shown that some natural consistent weakenings of Frege’s system do support the derivation of the mathematics Frege aimed to reconstruct.
