# Henri Lebesgue (1875–1941)

796

Further Reading

Grattan-Guinness, I. 2000.Roots. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. The Search for Mathematical Russell, B. 1983–.Routledge. Collected Papers, thirty volumes. London: Ivor Grattan-Guinness VI.72 Henri Lebesgue b. Beauvais, France, 1875; d. Paris, 1941 Theory of the integral; measure; applications in Fourier analysis; dimension in topology; calculus of variations Lebesgue studied at the École Normale in Paris (1894–97), where he was influenced by the slightly older borel Nancy he completed his seminal thesis “Intégrale,[VI.70](/part-06/emile-borel-18711956) and René-Louis Baire.
As a teacher at longueure, aire” (1902). After university positions in Rennes, Poitiers, and at the Sorbonne in Paris, and following war-related research, Lebesgue became a pro-fessor at the Sorbonne (1919) and then, finally, at the Collège de France (1921). One year later he was elected to the French Academy of Sciences. Lebesgue’s most important achievement was his generalization of This was partly in response to the need to include riemann’s [VI.49] notion of an integral.
broader classes of real-valued functions, and partly togive secure foundations to concepts such as the interchange ability of limit and integral in infinite series (par-ticularly Fourier series). Alluding to a famous example (1881) by Vito Volterra of a bounded derivative thatcould not be integrated, Lebesgue wrote in his thesis: The kind of integration defined by Riemann does notallow in all cases for the solution of the fundamental problem of the calculus: find a function with agiven derivative.
It thus seems natural to search for a definition of the integral which makes integration the inverse operation of differentiation in as large a class of functions as possible. range of a function and summing up sets ofdinates (or arguments) belonging to given Lebesgue defined his integral by partitioning they -coordi-x-coor- nates (or ordinates), rather than, as had traditionally been done, partitioning the domain. Lebesgue himself, according to his colleague, Paul Montel, compared his method with paying off a debt: I have to pay a certain sum, which I have collected in mypocket.
I take the bills and coins out of my pocket and give them to the creditor in the order I find them until I have reached the total sum. This is the Riemann integral. But I can proceed differently. After I have taken

VI. Mathematicians

out all my money I order the bills and coins accordingto identical values and then I pay the several heaps one after another to the creditor. This is my integral. ter of Lebesgue’s integral, as compared with the more intuitive and natural summation used by Riemann. This The comparison reveals the more theoretical characmeant that more sophisticated functions, which werenot necessarily integrable in Riemann’s sense, became “summable” according to Lebesgue.
In order to perform his summations, Lebesgue had to base his new integral on Borel’s notion of[III.55](/part-03/measures) (1898), which in turn drew heavily on cantor measure’s [VI.54](/part-06/georg-cantor-18451918) theory of infinite sets. He used infinitely many intervals to cover and to measure sets, and was thusable to measure much less intuitive subsets of the linear continuum (the reals) than had hitherto been considered.
A crucial role was played by the notion of“the set of measure zero” and the consider at i on of properties that were valid “except for” such sets, i.e., “almost every where.” This allowed for the theory to be streamlined to include fundamental results such as: “A bounded function is Riemann integrable if and only if the set of its points of discontinuity has measure zero.” ing it a true generalization oflier theory.
From Jordan he also borrowed the impor-Lebesgue completed Borel’s theory of measure, mak-jordan’s [VI.52](/part-06/camille-jordan-18381922) eartant notion of a function of bounded variation for histheory of the integral. Lebesgue ascribed a measure to any subset of a “set of measure zero,” and opened up broader theoretical questions such as whether there exist any sets that are not Lebesgue-measurable.
The latter question was proved in the affirmative by the Italian Giuseppe Vitali in 1905 with the help of theof choice [III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice), while Robert Solovay showed in 1970, axiom with methods of mathematical logic, that without the axiom of choice such existence cannot be proved (seeset theory [IV.22 §5.2](/part-04/set-theory)). Lebesgue himself remained skeptical about an unlimited use of set-theoretical principles such as the axiom of choice.
He held a restric-tive view of the “existence” of mathematical objects by making “definability” the touchstone for his empiricist philosophy of mathematics. leled, although not in such depth, in the work ofthe English mathematician W. H. Young—served as a Lebesgue’s integral—the idea of which was paral sophisticated stimulus to developments in harmonic and functional analysis (e.g., the Lp spaces of [VI.74](/part-06/frigyes-frdric-riesz-18801956) (1909)). Generalizations to functions defined onn-dimensional space, proposed by Lebesgue himself riesz