# Hermann Minkowski (1864–1909)

VI.64. Hermann Minkowski

Theologie.” However, the result was so powerful that ithas been said that it killed algebraic invariant theory. In 1893 Hilbert and Minkowski were asked by the German Mathematical Society to write a report on number theory. Hilbert chose algebraic number theory [IV.1](/part-04/number-theory) and transformed the results of the nineteenth century into the study of algebraic number fields [III.63](/part-03/number-fields).
The deep organizing structure Hilbert found eventually led to what has been called “the magnificent edifice of class field theory” (described in [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871)). lished in 1899 and revised many times, starts with real-number arithmetic. He assumes that it is consistent, i.e., Hilbert’s classic Foundations of Geometry , first pub that it is free of the possibility of contradictory deduc-tions. Using analytic geometry, he then exhibits a model ofreal numbers;
a line is a set of pairs of numbers that euclidean geometry [II.2 §3](/part-02/geometry-origins). A point is a pair of satisfy the equation for a line; a circle. . .; and so on. All of Euclid’s axioms are true statements about these“lines” and “points,” that is, they are true statements about these sets of real numbers. Euclidean geometryis there by reduced to a fraction of all the true statements about real numbers, and we conclude that if real number arithmetic is consistent then Euclid’s geometryis consistent.
Next Hilbert constructs models of various non-Euclidean geometries in terms of euclidean geometry, exploring in depth and with great inventiveness which possible axioms follow from which groups of axioms and which are independent yet consistent. Hilbert was invited to address the Second International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900.He gave a talk proposing twenty-three problems for the new century. These problems are known today as “Hilbert’s problems”;
in a sense they have created a vir-tual Göttingen where mathematicians have entered into conversation with Hilbert and each other ever since. Next Hilbert turned to analysis. weierstrass [VI.44](/part-06/karl-weierstrass-18151897) had found counterexamples to Dirichlet’s principle, which is essentially the assertion that, in variational problems, maxima and minima are always attained. Hilbert proved a modified, but still powerful, version that “salvaged” much of the work that assumed the principle.
The larger theme of this period, though, was integral equations and what is now called space [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis). Newton’s equations for motion are dif-hilbert ferential equations, and it was natural to phrase equa-tions in physics that way. However, in many cases it was easier to solve problems if the equations were written using integrals rather than derivatives. Between1902 and 1912 Hilbert attacked a variety of problems

789

from this direction. He viewed the solutions as part of Hilbert space and gave a spectral interpretation analogous to an infinite-dimensional vector space. Thus, an amorphous sea of functions acquired geometric structure. had some successes, but physics was under going mul-tiple revolutions and was not ready for mathematical In 1910 he turned toward mathematical physics and clarification. was aware that there were contradictions in mathe-When he delivered his problems in 1900, Hilbert matics as it was then phrased, and specifically in set theory.
His second problem asked for a proof that first arithmetic, and then set theory, were consistent. As the debate widened, some mathematicians began to pull back on what they accepted as valid reason-ing. Hilbert wanted none of this. By 1918 he was increasingly focused on a program to formally axiom-atize mathematics and prove it free of contradictions using proof-theoretic, combinatorial methods.[VI.92](/part-06/kurt-gdel-19061978) proved his incompleteness theorems in 1930 gödel and there by showed that Hilbert’s program, at least as initially conceived, could never be successful.
Hilbert was wrong here, but even if wrong, his dream of placing mathematics on a formal foundation stimulated some of the most important work of the twentieth century—and mathematics did not pull back.

Further Reading

Reid, C. 1986.Weyl, H. 1944. David Hilbert and his mathematical work. Hilbert–Courant. New York: Springer. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 50:612–54. Benjamin H. Yandell VI.64 Hermann Minkowski b. Alexotas, Russia (present day Kaunas, Lithuania), 1864; d. Göttingen, Germany, 1909 Number theory; geometry; relativity theory In 1883, the Paris Academy of Sciences awarded its prestigious Grand Prix for mathematical science to the eighteen - year - old student Hermann Minkowski.
The prize problem was to give the number of representations of an integer as a sum of five squares of inte - gers. In a manuscript of 140 pages written in German, Minkowski developed a general theory of forms [III.73](/part - 03/quadratic - forms) that contains the solution to this problem quadratic as a special case. Two years later, Minkowski obtained his Ph. D. in Königsberg, and in 1887 he received his