# Isaac Newton (1642–1727)

742                                                                                                 VI. Mathematicians

  Pascal is also known for a theorem in projective
geometry (given an arbitrary hexagon inscribed in any
conic section, if the three pairs of opposite sides are
continued until they meet, then the three points of
intersection lie on a straight line) (1640); and for a two-
function (addition and subtraction) mechanical calcu-
lating machine (1645).

VI.14      Isaac Newton
b. Woolsthorpe, England, 1642; d. London, 1727
Calculus; algebra; geometry; mechanics; optics;
mathematical astronomy

Newton entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1661,
and it was in Cambridge that he spent most of his for-
mative years, first as a student, then as a Fellow, and                              Isaac Newton
then, from 1669, as Lucasian Professor of Mathemat-
ics. His election to the Lucasian Chair was engineered
                                                              he knew from Wallis and which is expressed in famil-
by his mentor Isaac Barrow, a talented mathematician
                                                              iar Leibnizian notation as x n dx = x n+1 /(n + 1))
and theologian who was the first to hold the presti-
                                                              allowed him to “square” a variety of curves when they
gious chair. In 1696 Newton moved to London to take
                                                              were expanded as a power series. (In the seventeenth
up the post of Warden of the Mint. He resigned his
                                                              century, squaring a curvilinear figure meant finding
professorship in 1702.
                                                              a square the area of which is equal to that of the
   It appears that Newton’s interest in mathematics           curvilinear figure.)
began in 1664. In that year he embarked on a course              A few months later, Newton, with extraordinary in-
of self-instruction, reading viète’s [VI.9](/part-06/franois-vite-15401603) works (1646),     sight, realized that most of the problems dealt with by
Oughtred’s Clavis Mathematicae (1631), descartes’s            his contemporaries could be reduced to two classes:
[VI.11](/part-06/ren-descartes-15961650) La Géométrie (1637), and Wallis’s Arithmetica         problems in which one is required to find the tangent
Infinitorum (1656). From Descartes, Newton learned             to a curve, and problems in which one is required to
how useful it could be to relate algebra to geom-             find the area subtended by a curve. He conceived geo-
etry, since plane curves could be represented by alge-        metrical magnitudes as being generated by continuous
braic equations in two unknowns. Descartes had, how-          motion. For example, the motion of a point generates
ever, imposed strict limitations on the class of curves       a line and the motion of a line generates a surface.
allowed in La Géométrie: “geometrical” (i.e., algebraic)      These he called “fluents,” while the instantaneous rate
curves were admitted but “mechanical” (i.e., transcen-        of flow he called the “fluxion.” Basing his intuitions on
dental) ones were not. In common with many of his con-        kinematical models, he formulated a version of what is
temporaries, Newton felt that such limitations ought to       known today as the fundamental theorem of cal-
be overcome and that a “new analysis” capable of deal-        culus [I.3 §5.5](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). Namely, he proved that tangent and
ing with mechanical curves ought to be possible. He           area problems are inverses of each other. In modern
found the answer in infinite series.                           terms, Newton was able to reduce quadrature prob-
   Newton had learned how to deal with infinite series         lems (i.e., calculating curvilinear areas) to the search for
from Wallis’s work, and it was while elaborating one          primitive functions (indefinite integrals). He built “cat-
of Wallis’s techniques that, in the winter of 1664,           alogues of curves” (tables of integrals), deploying tech-
he obtained his first great mathematical discovery:            niques equivalent to substitution of variables and inte-
the binomial theorem for fractional powers. This pro-         gration by parts. He developed an efficient algorithm
vided him with a method for expanding into power              that allowed him to tackle both the direct (differential)
series a large class of “curves,” including transcenden-      and inverse (integral) methods of fluxions. He was able
tal curves, which could now be given an “analytical”          to calculate the tangent to and curvature of any known
representation to which the rules of algebra could be         curve, and perform integrations of many classes of
applied. Termwise application of the relation (which          (what we now call) ordinary differential equations. Such

