# Jacques Hadamard (1865–1963)

790

habilitation in Bonn with further work on quadratic forms inn variables. While a student in Königsberg, Minkowski became a close friend of Adolf Hurwitz and1894, after Hurwitz had moved to Zürich, minkowski hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943). In returned from Bonn to his alma mater, and soonbecame Hilbert’s successor after Hilbert left for Göttingen. In 1896, Minkowski moved on to Zurich to become Hurwitz’s colleague. In 1902, Hilbert nego-tiated for another chair of mathematics to be created for Minkowski in Göttingen. There he worked as Hilbert’s colleague and closest friend until he died, unexpectedly, of a ruptured appendix in early 1909. nious use of geometric intuition for the solution ofnumber-theoretic problems. His starting point was a Minkowski’s later work is characterized by an ingetheorem ofreal that can be represented by a given positive-definite hermite [VI.47](/part-06/charles-hermite-18221901) on the smallest positive quadratic form of By interpreting the quadratic forms in terms of geo-n integer-valued nonzero variables. metric objects such as ellipses (forsoids (for$n = 3)$, and considering the integer val-n = 2) or ellip- ues of the variables as the coordinates of the points of a regular lattice, Minkowski was able to employthe notion of volume to arrive at nontrivial numbertheoretic results. His investigations were published in1896 in a book entitled The Geometry of Numbers. Realizing that the geometric arguments based on ellipsoids used only the property of convexity, Minkowski fur-ther generalized his theory by introducing a general concept of convex point sets. Aing to Minkowski, is one in which the straight line con-convex body, ac co rd ne ct ing any two interior points lies completely within the set. This notion allowed Minkowski to investigate ageometry in which the Euclidean axiom about the congruence of triangles is replaced by the weaker axiomthat the sum of two sides of a triangle is always larger than the third one (which we would nowadays call the triangle inequality Theorems about this Minkowskian geometry also pro-, the key notion in metric spaces). duced immediate nontrivial number-theoretic results.Further results were obtained in the theory of continued fractions [III.22]. In 1907, Minkowski published introductory lectures on number theory under the title Diophantine Approximations. In 1906, he wrote the article on capillarity for the authoritative Minkowski always had a deep interest in physics.Encyclopedia of the Mathematical Sciences (edited by Hilbert and Minkowski gave joint seminars in which klein [VI.57] and others). In Göttingen,

VI. Mathematicians

they studied contemporary work in electrodynamics by poincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912), Einstein, and others. Minkowski soon realized the significance of the fact that the special theory of relativity was a consequence of the invariance of the Maxwell equations under the group of Lorentz transformations (seeand the einstein equations [IV.13 §1](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations)). He reinter - general relativity preted Maxwell–Lorentz electrodynamics geometrically in a mathematical formulation in which no formal dis - tinction between the space and time coordinates exists. This is expressed in the famous opening words of his address to the Cologne meeting of the Society of Ger - man Scientists and Physicians a few weeks before his death: “From this hour on, space by itself and time by itself are to sink fully into shadows and only akind of union of the two should yet preserve autonomy.” Minkowski’s four - dimensional Lorentz - covariant formulation of special relativity was a prerequisite for Einstein’s later general theory of relativity. Further Reading Hilbert, D. 1910. Hermann Minkowski.nalen 68:445–71. Mathematische An Walter, S. 1999. Minkowski, mathematicians, and the math - ematical theory of relativity. In The Expanding Worlds of General Relativity Boston: Birkhäuser., edited by H. Goenner et al., pp. 45–86. Tilman Sauer VI.65 Jacques Hadamard b. Versailles, France, 1865; d. Paris, 1963 Function theory; calculus of variations; number theory; partial differential equations; hydrodynamics A graduate of the École Normale in Paris, Hadamard obtained a position at the University of Bordeaux in 1893.He returned to Paris in 1897 where he taught at the Collège de France, the École Polytechnique, and the École Centrale until his retirement in 1937. The Hada - mard Seminar at the Collège de France, where mathematicians came from around the world to expound on recent results, was an influential and integral part of mathematical life in France between the wars. with the theory of Hadamard’s first significant papers were concerned holomorphic functions [I.3 §5.6](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions) of a complex variable, in particular with the analytic continuation of a Taylor series; and in his thesis of 1892 he investigated how the properties of the singu - larities of a series could be deduced from those of its
