# James Joseph Sylvester (1814–1897)

768

of thein which he introduced what is now called the Galois Premier Mémoire. This is the remarkable work group of an equation and showed how solubility of the equation in terms of radicals could be precisely characterized by a property of the group. It was themier Mémoire which turned the theory of equations Preinto what is now called The Second Mémoire galois theory also exists. Galois never com-[V.21](/part-05/the-insolubility-of-the-quintic). pleted it, however, nor is it all correct. Nevertheless, itis an exciting document that focuses on aspects of what is now recognized as the theory of groups. Its main theorem is (in group-theoretic language) that every primi-tive soluble permutation group has degree a power of a prime number and may be represented as a groupof affine transformations over the prime field F . It also contains an incomplete study of two-dimensional linear groups over F . The Troisième Mémoire, which$p$ he described as being on the theory of integrals and elliptic functionsp[V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem), has never been found. théorie des nombres,” the Mémoire Galois’s main work—comprising the paper “Sur la, and the letter to Chevalier—was finally pub-Premier Mémoire, the Second lished byby Bourgne and Azra, including every known fragment liouville [VI.39](/part-06/joseph-liouville-18091882) in 1846. A critical edition of Galois’s writing, was published in 1962.Galois’s legacy is enormous. His ideas led directly to “abstract algebra” (see [II.3 §6](/part-02/abstract-algebra-development)): when the abstract notion of field developed later in the nineteenth century, it turned out that most of the theory of finite fieldshad already been anticipated in that first paper; Galois theory developed directly out of the material in the Premier Mémoire; and the theory of groups developed from the ideas in the Mémoire together with a series of papers published by Premier Mémoire and the Second Cauchy in 1845.

Further Reading

Bourgne, R., and J.-P. Azra, eds. 1962.Mathématiques d’Évariste Galois. Paris: Gauthiers-Villars.Écrits et Mémoires Edwards, H. M. 1984.Taton, R. 1983. Évariste Galois and his contemporaries.Galois Theory. New York: Springer. Toti Rigatelli, L. 1996.Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society from the Italian by J. Denton. Basel: Birkhäuser.Évariste Galois 1811–183215:107–18., translated Peter M. Neumann VI.42 James Joseph Sylvester b. London, 1814; d. London, 1897 Algebra As a Jew, Sylvester could neither take the degree heearned at St John’s College, Cambridge, in 1837 nor

VI. Mathematicians

compete for positions at England’s Anglican universi-ties. This effectively forced him down a convoluted path toward his personal goal of a career as a research mathematician. He worked as an actuary in London in the1840 s and 1850 s before qualifying as a lawyer by passing the English Bar. He was unemployed for some sixyears in the 1870 s, but held professorships at various times, both of natural philosophy and of mathemat-ics, in England and in the United States. Most notably, Sylvester served as the first Professor of mathematics at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, from 1876 to 1883 and, thanks to an 1871 law that finally made it possible for non-Anglicans to hold professorships at Oxbridge, was eligible for and won the appointment as Oxford’s Savilian Professor of Geom-etry in 1883. He held the Oxford chair until ill health forced his retirement in 1894. The program sylvester set up at Johns Hopkins established his pivotal place in the history of American research-level mathematics, while his mathematical accomplishments had garnered him an international reputation as early as the 1860 s. with work on the problem of determining when two polynomial equations have a common root. This nat-Sylvester entered the research arena in the late 1830 s urally led not only to questions in the theory of determinants but also to an explicit, pioneering, and self-consciously algebraic analysis of the intermediate expressions that arise in Charles François Sturm’s algorithm for determining the number of real roots of a polynomial equation that lie between two given real numbers (1839, 1840). Sylvester followed this up with what he called the dialytic method of elimination: a new criterion in terms of determinants [III.15](/part-03/determinants) for detecting whether two polynomial equations have a common root (1841).His next major research push came in the 1850 s when, together with theory of invariants. This involved an associated andcayley [VI.46](/part-06/arthur-cayley-18211895), he formulated a slightly more general theory of “covariants.” More concretely, given a binary form of a particular degree, Sylvester and Cayley devised techniques both for explicitly finding invariants and covariants of that formand for determining algebraic relations, or “syzygies,” between them. Sylvester tackled these questions in two important papers: “On the principles of the calculus offorms” (1852) and “On a theory of the syzygetic relations of two rational integral functions” (1853). In thelatter, he proved, among other results, Sylvester’s law of inertia: if$Q(x^{1}$, . . . , xn) is a real quadratic form [III.73](/part-03/quadratic-forms) of rank$r$, then there exists a (real) nonsingular
