# John Edensor Littlewood (1885–1977)

VI.79. John Edensor Littlewood

that any one-to-one area-preserving transformation ofan annulus that moves the boundary circles in opposite directions must have at least two fixed points, and its importance lies in the fact that its proof implies the existence of periodic orbits in the restricted threebody problem.) He introduced several new concepts into dynamical theory, including “recurrent motion” (1912) and “metric transitivity” (1928), and promoted the use of symbolism in dynamics (1935), the latter helping to pave the way for the formalized development of symbolic dynamics (the branch of dynami-cal systems invented
by hadamard [VI.65](/part-06/jacques-hadamard-18651963) (1898) that deals with spaces consisting of infinite sequences of symbols) by Marston Morse and Gustav Hedlund at theend of the 1930 s. His book Dynamical Systems (1927) was the first book on the qualitative theory of systems defined by differential equations. Awash with topological ideas, it provides a connected account of much of his earlier research. Closely related to Birkhoff’s dynamical research was his work ontheorems of Bernard Koopman and ergodic theory [V.9](/part-05/ergodic-theorems).
Stimulated by thevon neumann [VI.91](/part-06/john-von-neumann-19031957), Birkhoff presented his own ergodic theorem in 1931, a fundamental result both for statistical mechan-ics and for measure theory [III.55](/part-03/measures), the proof of which combined Poincaré’s topological approach with theuse of Lebesgue measure theory.
(Roughly speaking, Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem states that for any dynamical system given by differential equations that pos-sesses an invariant volume integral, there is a definite “time probability”those of a set of measure zero, will be in an assignedp that any moving point, except region interval andv. In other words, ift* is the portion of time during which thet is a total elapsed time point is in$v$, then lim t*/t = p.) cated mathematical symmetry and simplicity above physical intuition.
His books on relativity theory (which In the creation of physical theories Birkhoff advowere among the first on the subject in English), ity and Modern Physics (1923) and The Origin, Nature, Relativand Influence of relativity cally original and widely read.
At the time of his death(1925), were character i st i he was engaged in developing a new theory of matter (taken to be a perfect fluid), electricity, and gravitation, which he had first proposed in 1943 and which, unlike Einstein’s theory, was based on flat spacetime. Birkhoff published in several other fields, including the calculus of variations [III.94](/part-03/variational-methods) and map coloring, and he was the coauthor (with Ralph Beatley) ofa textbook of elementary geometry (1929). His paper

803

(with O. D. Kellogg) on fixed points in function space(1922) provided a stimulus for the later work of Leray and Schauder. Birkhoff had a lifelong interest in the arts and was fascinated by the problem of analyzing the fundamen-tals of musical and artistic form. In later life he lectured extensively on the application of mathematics to aes-thetics, and his book Aesthetic Measure (1933) enjoyed popular success.

Further Reading

Aubin, D. 2005. George David Birkhoff. Dynamical systems. In Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics 16401940 dam: Elsevier., edited by I. Grattan-Guinness, pp. 871–81. Amster VI.79 John Edensor Littlewood b. Rochester, England, 1885; d. Cambridge, England, 1977 Analysis; number theory;
differential equations Littlewood made important contributions to several different branches of analysis and analytic number theory, including Abelian and Tauberian theory, the riemann zeta function goldbach’s conjecture[IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory),[V.27](/part-05/problems-and-results-in-vi36-peter-gustav-lejeune-dirichlet-18051859), harmonic analysis, waring’s problem, probabilistic analysis, and nonlinear differential equa - tions. He loved concrete problems such as the riemann hypothesis [IV.2 §3](/part - 04/number - theory): he was arguably the best problem solver of his generation.
Much of his work was done in collaboration with hardy [VI.73](/part - 06/godfrey - harold - hardy - 18771947): the Hardy–Littlewood partnership dominated the mathematical scene in the United Kingdom for a third of a century. With the exception of three years in Manchester, he lived all his adultlife in Trinity College, Cambridge. From 1928 until his retirement in 1950, he was the first holder of the Rouse Ball Chair of Mathematics in Cambridge.
converse ofseries of reals His first major result, published in 1911, was a deepabel a’s [VI.33](/part-06/niels-henrik-abel-18021829) classical theorem that if asums to A, then a xn also tends tofalse, but Tauber had proved that it is true if A as x \to  1 from below. In general, the converse i(sn)n na \to  0. Littlewood extended this by weakening the condition ton an being bounded.
This result gave rise to ann extended area of analysis called Tauberian theorems. In the theory of functions, he did elegant, important, and innovative work on injective holomorphic func-tions, the minimum modulus, and subharmonic functions. In particular, he worked on the conjecture that Bieberbach made in 1916 that iff (z) = z + a z2 +a3 z3 + · · · is an injective holomorphic function