# Joseph Liouville (1809–1882)

766

contributions to the development of mathematical logic. He is particularly remembered for what we now call de Morgan’s laws, which he first published in 1858 in a paper in thesophical Society. The “laws” can be stated (using the Transactions of the Cambridge Ph i lo not at i on of sets) as follows. Ifset X, then (A ∩ B)c = Ac ∪ Bc Aandand(AB∪are subsets of a B)c = Ac ∩ Bc, where “∪” represents union, “∩” represents intersection, and a superscript “c” denotes the complement with respect to X. VI.39 Joseph Liouville b. Saint Omer, France, 1809; d. Paris, 1882 Differentiation of arbitrary order; integration in closed form; Sturm–Liouville theory; potential theory; mechanics; differential geometry; doubly periodic functions; transcendental numbers; quadratic forms Liouville was the leading French mathematician inthe generation between cauchy [VI.29](/part-06/augustin-louis-cauchy-17891857) and hermite [VI.47](/part-06/charles-hermite-18221901). He taught analysis and mechanics at his almamater, the École Polytechnique, until 1851, when he became professor at the Collège de France. Moreover, he was professor at the Sorbonne from 1857 and member of the Paris Academy of Sciences and the Bureaudes Longitudes. In 1836 he founded the Journal de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquéesthis day. , which exists to His wide-ranging research was often inspired by physics. For example, his early theory of differential operators of the form(d/dx)k, where k is an arbitrary complex number, had its origin in Ampère’s electro-dynamics. Similarly, Sturm–Liouville theory, which he developed in around 1836 with his friend C. F. Sturm, was inspired by the theory of heat conduction. Sturm Liouville theory deals with a linear self-adjoint second-order differential equation involving a parameter that must be chosen so that there exist nontrivial solutions(eigenfunctions) that satisfy given boundary-value conditions. Liouville’s main contribution to this theory wasa proof that an “arbitrary” function has a convergent “Fourier expansion” in terms of eigenfunctions. Sturm Liouville theory was a major step toward a more qual-itative theory of differential equations, and the first work on spectral theory of a general class of differential operators. transcendental numbers known example is In 1844 Liouville gave the first proof that there exist\infty  10^-n[III.41](/part-03/irrational-and-transcendental-numbers), \text{of which a well}-!. In a similar vein, in the 1830 s he had already shown that there are elemen-tary functions such as en=1 t/t \text{whose integrals are not}

VI. Mathematicians

expressible in elementary (or closed) form, i.e., in termsof algebraic functions, exponentials, and logarithms. In particular he proved that the elliptic integrals are nonelementary. proach totic integrals), based on a systematic investigation of Around 1844 Liouville suggested an entirely new ap-elliptic functions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) (inverses of ellipdoubly periodic complex functions and in particular the observation that such a function must have singularities if it is not constant. When Cauchy heard of this theorem he immediately generalized it to the statement that any bounded complex analytic function must be a constant. Today this is called Liouville’stheorem. theorem stating that the volume in phase space is con-In mechanics, Liouville’s name is connected with the stant when a mechanical system moves according tohamilton’s equations [III.88 §2.1](/part-03/symplectic-manifolds). In fact, Liouville proved the constancy of a certain formed from the solutions of a general class of differ-determinant [III.15](/part-03/determinants) ential equations. It was jacobi [VI.35](/part-06/carl-gustav-jacob-jacobi-18041851) who pointed out that the theorem applied to Hamilton’s equations, and Boltzmann who interpreted the determinant as the volume in phase space, and emphasized its importance in statistical mechanics. to mechanics and to potential theory. For example, Liouville made many other important contributions Jacobi had postulated that when the angular momen-tum of a fluid planet revolving around an axis is high enough, there are two shapes that are in equilibrium in their rotating frames of reference: an ellipsoid of revolution and an ellipsoid with three different axes.Liouville showed that Jacobi was right, and moreover proved the surprising result that only the latter fig-ure is in stable equilibrium. Liouville published only the result, leaving the verification to Lyapunov andpoincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) (at least if the angular momentum is not too large).The first mathematician to recognize the significance of tions galois[V.20](/part-05/the-insolubility-of-the-halting-problem), Liouville did a great service to algebra’s [VI.41](/part - 06/variste - galois - 18111832) theory of solvability of equawhen he published some of Galois’s most important papers in his journal. Further Reading Lützen, J. 1990.and Applied Mathematics Joseph Liouville 1809–1882: Master of Pure. Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, volume 15. New York: Springer. Jesper Lützen
