# Jules Henri Poincaré (1854–1912)

VI.61.   Jules Henri Poincaré

Further Reading
Cooke, R. 1984. The Mathematics of Sonya Kovalevskaya.
 New York: Springer.
Koblitz, A. H. 1983. A Convergence of Lives. Sofia Kovalev-    until Philip Hall started his mathematical career in
 skaia: Scientist, Writer, Revolutionary. Boston, MA: Birk-   1928. Burnside’s influential book Theory of Groups
 häuser.
VI.60
b. London, 1852; d. West Wickham, England, 1927
Theory of groups; character theory; representation theory
Burnside’s mathematical abilities first showed them-
selves at school. From there he won a place at Cam-
bridge, where he read for the Mathematical Tripos and
graduated as 2 nd Wrangler in 1875. For ten years he
remained in Cambridge as a Fellow of Pembroke Col-
lege, coaching student rowers and mathematicians. In
1885, having published three very short papers, he was
appointed professor at the Royal Naval College, Green-
wich. He married in 1886 and the next year, at the
age of thirty-five, he embarked on his career as a pro-
ductive mathematician. He was elected as a Fellow of
the Royal Society in 1893 on the basis of his contri-
but i ons in applied mathematics (statistical mechanics
and hydrodynamics), geometry, and the theory of func-
tions. Although he continued to contribute to these
areas through out his working life, and added probabil-
ity theory to his fields of interest during World War I,
he turned to the theory of groups in 1893, and it is for
his discoveries in this subject that he is remembered.
   Burnside treated every aspect of the theory of finite
groups. He was much concerned with the search for
finite simple groups, and made the famous conjecture,
finally proved by Walter Feit and John Thompson in
1962, that there are no simple groups of odd compos-
ite order (see the classification of finite simple
groups [V.7](/part-05/the-classication-of-finite-simple-groups)). He helped to develop character theory,
which had been created by frobenius [VI.58](/part-06/ferdinand-georg-frobenius-18491917) in 1896,
into a tool for proving theorems of pure group theory,
using it in 1904 to spectacular effect when he proved
his so-called p α qβ -theorem: the theorem that groups
whose orders are divisible by at most two different
prime numbers are soluble. By asking, in effect, whether
a group all of whose elements have finite order and
which is generated by finitely many elements must be
finite, he launched the huge area of research which for
much of the twentieth century was known as the Burn-
side problem (see geometric and combinatorial
group theory [IV.10 §5.1](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory)).

785
Although cayley [VI.46](/part-06/arthur-cayley-18211895) and the Reverend T. P. Kirk-
man had written about groups before him, he was the
only British mathematician to work in group theory
of Finite Order (1897) was written in the hope of
“arousing interest among English mathematicians in a
branch of pure mathematics which becomes the more
William Burnside
his own country was minimal, however, until several
years after his death. It went to a second edition in
1911 (reprinted 1955), which differs from the first in
that it has been substantially revised and, in particu-
lar, it includes chapters about the character theory of
finite groups and its applications—mathematics which
had been much developed by Frobenius, Burnside, and
Schur over the fifteen years following the invention of
character theory in 1896.
Further Reading
Curtis, C. W. 1999. Pioneers of Representation Theory: Frobe-
nius, Burnside, Schur, and Brauer. Providence, RI: Ameri-
can Mathematical Society.
Neumann, P. M., A. J. S. Mann, and J. C. Tompson. 2004.
The Collected Papers of William Burnside, two volumes.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peter M. Neumann
VI.61       Jules Henri Poincaré
b. Nancy, France, 1854; d. Paris, 1912
Function theory; geometry; topology; celestial mechanics;
mathematical physics; foundations of science
Educated at the École Polytechnique and the École
des Mines in Paris, Poincaré began his teaching career
at the University of Caen in 1879. In 1881 he took
up an appointment at the University of Paris where,
from 1886, he held successive chairs until his death
in 1912. He was of a retiring nature and did not attract
graduate students, but his lecture courses provided the
basis for a number of treatises, mostly in mathematical
physics.
Poincaré came to international prominence in the
early 1880 s when, fusing ideas from complex func-
tion theory, group theory, non-Euclidean geometry, and
the theory of ordinary linear differential equations, he
identified an important class of automorphic functions.
Named Fuchsian functions, in honor of the mathemat i-
cian Lazarus Fuchs, they are defined on a disk and

786

remain invariant under certain discrete groups of trans-
formations. Soon after, he identified the related but
more complicated Kleinian functions, which are auto-
morphic functions with out a limit circle. His theory of
automorphic functions was the first significant appli-
cation of non-Euclidean geometry. It led to his discov-    let problem itself should give rise to a sequence of
ery of the disk model of the hyperbolic plane and later    eigenvalues and eigenfunctions [I.3 §4.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) (1898). In
inspired the uniformization theorem [V.34](/part-05/the-uniformization-theorem).
   During the same period Poincaré began pioneering
work on the qualitative theory of differential equations,   plex function theory. In Électricité et Optique (1890,
motivated in part by an interest in some of the fun-
da mental questions of mechanics, notably the prob-
lem of the stability of the solar system. What was new     magnetic theories of Maxwell, Helmholtz, and Hertz. In
and important was his idea of thinking of the solu-
tions in terms of curves rather than functions, i.e.,
thinking geometrically rather than algebraically, and
it was this that marked a departure from the work
of his predecessors, whose research had been domi-
nated by power-series methods. From the mid 1880 s
he began applying his geometric theory to problems in
celestial mechanics. His memoir on the three-body
problem [V.33](/part-05/the-three-body-problem) (1890) is famous both for providing
the basis for his acclaimed treatise, Les Méthodes Nou-    became widely known through four books of essays:
velles de la Mécanique Céleste (1892–99), and for con-     La Science et l’Hypothèse (1902), La Valeur de la Sci-
taining the first mathematical description of chaotic
behavior [IV.14 §1.5](/part-04/dynamics) in a dynamical system. Stabil-
ity was also at the heart of his investigation into the    proponent of the view, known as conventionalism, that
forms of rotating fluid masses (1885). This work, which     it is not an objective question which model of geometry
contained the discovery of new, pear-shaped figures

VI. Mathematicians
of equilibrium, aroused considerable attention because
of its important implications for cosmogony in rela-
tion to the evolution of binary stars and other celestial
bodies.
Poincaré’s work on Fuchsian functions and on the
qualitative theory of differential equations led him to
recognize the importance of the topology (or, as it was
then called, analysis situs) of manifolds [I.3 §6.9](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). And
in the 1890 s he began to study the topology of man-
ifolds as a subject in its own right, effectively cre-
ating the powerful independent field of algebraic
topology [IV.6](/part-04/algebraic-topology). In a series of memoirs published
between 1892 and 1904, the last of which contains the
hypothesis known today as the poincaré conjecture
[IV.7 §2.4](/part-04/dierential-topology), he introduced a number of new ideas and
concepts, including Betti numbers, the fundamental
group [IV.6 §2](/part-04/algebraic-topology), homology [IV.6 §4](/part-04/algebraic-topology), and torsion.
A deep interest in physical problems lay behind
Jules Henri Poincaré
work in potential theory forms a bridge between that
of Carl Neumann on boundary-value problems and
that of fredholm [VI.66](/part-06/ivar-fredholm-18661927) on integral equations. He
introduced a technique known as the “méthode de
balayage” (“sweeping-out method”) for establishing
the existence of solutions to the dirichlet problem
[IV.12 §1](/part-04/analysis) (1890); and he had the idea that the Dirich-
developing the theory for functions of several variables
he was led to the discovery of new results in com-
revised 1901), which derived from his university lec-
tures, he gave an authoritative account of the electro-
1905 he responded to Lorentz’s new theory of the elec-
tron, coming close to anticipating Einstein’s theory of
special relativity [IV.13 §1](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations), there by provoking con-
troversy among later writers about the question of pri-
ority. And in 1911 he attended the first Solvay Con-
ference on quantum theory, publishing an influential
memoir (1912) in its favor.
As Poincaré’s career developed, so too did his interest
in the philosophy of mathematics and science. His ideas
ence (1905), Science et Méthode (1908), and Dernières
Pensées (1913). As a philosopher of geometry he was a
best fits physical space but is rather a matter of which