# Jules Henri Poincaré (1854–1912)

VI.61. Jules Henri Poincaré

Further Reading

Cooke, R. 1984.New York: Springer. The Mathematics of Sonya Kovalevskaya. Koblitz, A. H. 1983.skaia: Scientist, Writer, Revolutionary A Convergence of Lives. Sofia Kovalev-. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser. VI.60 William Burnside b. London, 1852; d. West Wickham, England, 1927 Theory of groups; character theory; representation theory Burnside’s mathematical abilities first showed themselves at school. From there he won a place at Cam-bridge, where he read for the Mathematical Tripos and graduated as 2 nd Wrangler in 1875.
For ten years he remained in Cambridge as a Fellow of Pembroke Col-lege, coaching student rowers and mathematicians. In 1885, having published three very short papers, he was appointed professor at the Royal Naval College, Green-wich. He married in 1886 and the next year, at the age of thirty-five, he embarked on his career as a productive mathematician. He was elected as a Fellow ofthe Royal Society in 1893 on the basis of his contributions in applied mathematics (statistical mechanics and hydrodynamics), geometry, and the theory of functions.
Although he continued to contribute to theseareas through out his working life, and added probability theory to his fields of interest during World War I, he turned to the theory of groups in 1893, and it is forhis discoveries in this subject that he is remembered. groups.
He was much concerned with the search for Burnside treated every aspect of the theory of finite finite simple groups, and made the famous conjecture, finally proved by Walter Feit and John Thompson in 1962, that there are no simple groups of odd composite order (seegroups [V.7](/part-05/the-classication-of-finite-simple-groups)).
He helped to develop character theory, the classification of finite simple which had been created by frobenius [VI.58](/part-06/ferdinand-georg-frobenius-18491917) in 1896, into a tool for proving theorems of pure group theory, using it in 1904 to spectacular effect when he proved his so-called$p^{α}q^{β}$-theorem: the theorem that groups whose orders are divisible by at most two different prime numbers are soluble.
By asking, in effect, whether a group all of whose elements have finite order and which is generated by finitely many elements must befinite, he launched the huge area of research which for much of the twentieth century was known as the Burnside problem (seegroup theory [IV.10 §5.1](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory)).geometric and combinatorial

785

man had written about groups before him, he was the Although cayley [VI.46](/part-06/arthur-cayley-18211895) and the Reverend T. P. Kirkonly British mathematician to work in group theory until Philip Hall started his mathematical career in

1928. Burnside’s influential book Theory of Groups of Finite Order“arousing interest among English mathematicians in a(1897) was written in the hope of branch of pure mathematics which becomes the more interesting the more it is studied.” Its influence in his own country was minimal, however, until several years after his death.
It went to a second edition in 1911 (reprinted 1955), which differs from the first in that it has been substantially revised and, in particu - lar, it includes chapters about the character theory of finite groups and its applications—mathematics which had been much developed by Frobenius, Burnside, and Schur over the fifteen years following the invention of character theory in 1896. Further Reading Curtis, C. W. 1999.nius, Burnside, Schur, and Brauer Pioneers of Representation Theory: Frobe-. Providence, RI: Ameri Neumann, P. M., A. J. S. Mann, and J. C. Tompson.
2004.can Mathematical Society. The Collected Papers of William Burnside, two volumes. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Peter M. Neumann VI.61 Jules Henri Poincaré b. Nancy, France, 1854; d. Paris, 1912 Function theory; geometry; topology; celestial mechanics; mathematical physics; foundations of science Educated at the École Polytechnique and the Écoledes Mines in Paris, Poincaré began his teaching career at the University of Caen in 1879. In 1881 he took up an appointment at the University of Paris where, from 1886, he held successive chairs until his death in 1912.
He was of a retiring nature and did not attract graduate students, but his lecture courses provided the basis for a number of treatises, mostly in mathematical physics. early 1880 s when, fusing ideas from complex func - Poincaré came to international prominence in the tion theory, group theory, non - Euclidean geometry, andthe theory of ordinary linear differential equations, he identified an important class of automorphic functions. Named Fuchsian functions, in honor of the mathemati - cian Lazarus Fuchs, they are defined on a disk and