# Karl Weierstrass (1815–1897)

770

algebra. From his earlier study of languages, he real-ized that there were mathematical structures concealed in everyday speech. For example, the class of European men, together with (i.e., union) the class of European women, is the same as the class of European men andwomen. By using letters to represent a class, or set, of objects, he could write the above asz(x + y) =zx + zy , where the letters x, y, and z represent the class of men, the class of women, and the class of all Europeans, respectively. Here addition is to be understood as union, at least for disjoint classes like menand women, and multiplication is to be understood as intersection. The principal laws of Boole’s algebra are commutativity, distributivity, and the law which he called the“fundamental law of duality” and which is represented byx2 = x. This law can be interpreted by observing that the class of all white sheep intersected with theclass of all white sheep is still the class of all white sheep. Unlike his other laws, all of which apply to ordi-nary numerical algebra, this law applies to numerical algebra only when$x is 0 or 1$. that the study of well-defined classes or sets of objectsis capable of precise mathematical interpretation and is Boole broke with traditional mathematics by showing indeed fundamental to mathematical analysis. In sim-ple cases, his approach also reduces classical logic to symbolic mathematical form. Using the symbols 0 and1 to denote “nothing” and “universe” respectively, and denoting the complement of the class$x by 1 - x$, he derived (from the law of duality) the law$x(1 - x) = 0$, which represents the impossibility of an object simul-taneously possessing and not possessing a given property, otherwise known as the principle of contradic-tion. Boole also applied his calculus to the theory of probability. Boole’s algebra lay dormant until 1939, when Shannon discovered that it was the appropriate language for describing digital switching circuits. Boole’s work thus became an essential tool in the modern development of electronics and digital computer technology. ematics: differential equations, difference equations, Boole also made several other contributions to math operator theory, calculus of integrals, etc. His text-books on differential equations (1859) and finite differences (1860) include much of his original research and are still in print today, but he is best remembered as the father of symbolic logic and one of the foundersof computer science.

VI. Mathematicians

Further Reading

Mac Hale, D. 1983.Boole Press. George Boole, His Life and Work. Dublin:

Des Mac Hale

VI.44 Karl Weierstrass

b. Ostenfelde, Germany, 1815; d. Berlin, 1897 Analysis Weierstrass began his career studying finance and administration at the University of Bonn but his real interest was mathematics and he did not complete his course. He qualified as a teacher and taught in gym-nasia for fourteen years. The turning point in his life occurred when, at the age of almost forty, he publisheda ground-breaking paper on Abelian functions, in which he solved the problem of inversion of hyperelliptic inte-grals. Shortly afterward he was offered a position at the University of Berlin. He demanded of himself the very strictest standards, with the result that he published little. His ideas, and his reputation, spread through his excellent lectures, which drew students and established mathematicians from around the world.Weierstrass has been described as the “father of modern analysis.” He contributed to all branches of the subject: calculus, differential and integral equa-tions, the calculus of variations [III.94](/part-03/variational-methods), infinite series, elliptic and Abelian functions, and real and com-plex analysis. His work is characterized by attention to foundations and by scrupulous logical reasoning.“Weierstrass i an rigor” has come to denote rigor of the strictest standard. was heuristic, lacking logical foundations. The nine-teenth century ushered in a rigorous spirit in mathe-Calculus in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries matics which included an examination of the foundation of various fields of mathematics.initiated this process in calculus in the 1820 s. Butcauchy [VI.29](/part-06/augustin-louis-cauchy-17891857) there were several major foundational problems withhis approach: verbal definitions of limit and continuity; frequent use of infinitesimals; and intuitive appealto geometry in proving the existence of various limits. Weierstrass and dedekind [VI.50](/part-06/julius-wilhelm-richard-dedekind-18311916) (among others) determined to remedy this unsatisfactory situation, and set themselves the goal of establishing theorems in a “purely arithmetic” manner, as Dedekind put it.To that end, Weierstrass gave preciseε–δdefinitions ofwe still use today), thus banishing infinitesimals fromlimit [I.3 §5.1](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions) and continuity [I.3 §5.2](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions) (those
