# Kurt Gödel (1906–1978)

VI.93.   André Weil                                                                                                  819

Further Reading                                               generally, to any reasonable extension of them (such as
                                                              the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory).
Aspray, W. 1990. John von Neumann and the Origins of
  Modern Computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                    Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem represented
                                                              another blow to the Hilbert program. Suppose that
                                               Wolfgang Coy   we have a set of axioms T (for example, the Peano
                                                              axioms) that is consistent. Can we prove that it is con-
                                                              sistent? Gödel showed that, if T is consistent, then
VI.92      Kurt Gödel
                                                              the statement “T is consistent” (when encoded as a
b. Brno, Moravia (now Czech Republic), 1906;
d. Princeton, New Jersey, 1978                                statement of number theory) cannot be proved from T .
Logic; relativity theory                                      So “T is consistent” is an explicit example of a true
                                                              but unprovable statement. Again, this applies when T
Born in Brno, Moravia, Gödel did his most important           is the set of Peano axioms, or any reasonable exten-
work at the University of Vienna. In 1940 he emigrated        sion there of (roughly, any extension that allows one
to the United States, where he accepted an appointment        to encode into arithmetic statements about pro vab il-
at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.             ity and the like). As a slogan: “a theory cannot prove its
  Considered the greatest mathematical logician of the        own consistency.”
twentieth century, Gödel is renowned for his proofs of           The axiom of choice became highly controversial
three fundamental results: the semantic completeness          when Ernst Zermelo used it to prove that every set can
of first-order logic [IV.23 §2](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory); the syntactic incom-          be well-ordered, a task that, together with the proof
pleteness of formal number theory [V.15](/part-05/gdels-theorem); and                 of the continuum hypothesis, Hilbert had listed first
the consistency, relative to the axioms of zermelo–           among the problems he posed in 1900 to the Inter-
fraenkel [IV.22 §3.1](/part-04/set-theory) set theory, of the axiom of             national Congress of Mathematicians. In 1938 Gödel
choice [III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice) and the generalized continuum hypoth-          showed that both the axiom of choice and the gen-
esis [IV.22 §5](/part-04/set-theory).                                              eralized continuum hypothesis are consequences of
  Gödel’s completeness theorem (1930) is concerned            another principle (the axiom of construct i bility) that
with the following kind of question: how do we know           holds in a submodel of any model of Zermelo–Fraenkel
that a statement in group theory, for example, that is        set theory. Both are consequently consistent with (not
true in every group is actually provable from the axioms      disprovable from) the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms. Much
of group theory? Gödel showed that in any first-order          later (1963) Paul Cohen showed that both statements
theory (one in which quantifiers are allowed over ele-         are also independent of (not provable from) those
ments but not over subsets), any statement true in all        axioms.
models is indeed provable. In an equivalent form, this           Apart from logic, Gödel also worked in relativity
completeness theorem states that any set of statements        theory, where he established the existence of models
that is consistent (that is, from which no contradiction      of einstein’s field equations [IV.13](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations) that permit time
may be derived) has a model—a structure in which all          travel into the past.
those statements hold.
  Gödel’s incompleteness theorem (1931) sent shock            Further Reading
waves through logic and the philosophy of mathemat-
                                                              Dawson Jr., J. W. 1997. Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work
ics. hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) had set out a program in which all        of Kurt Gödel. Natick, MA: A. K. Peters.
statements (in number theory, for example) should be
derivable from a fixed set of axioms. It was generally                                                 John W. Dawson Jr.
believed that such a program was in principle possible,
until the incompleteness theorem destroyed that hope.         VI.93       André Weil
  Gödel’s idea was to construct a statement S that, in        b. Paris, 1906; d. Princeton, New Jersey, 1998
effect, asserts “S is not provable.” A moment’s thought        Algebraic geometry; number theory
shows that such a statement must be both true and
unprovable. Gödel’s remarkable achievement was to             André Weil was one of the most influential mathemat i-
manage to encode such a statement in the language             cians of the twentieth century. His influence is due
of number theory. His proof applies to such axioms as         both to his original contributions to a remarkably broad
the peano axioms [III.67](/part-03/the-peano-axioms) for number theory, and more         spectrum of mathematical theories, and to the mark