# Leonardo of Pisa (known as Fibonacci)                 VI.57   Christian Felix Klein (1849–1925)

782

Frege’s life and he ceased serious work for over adecade. Though he resumed writing in 1918 with a The years after 1903 brought personal tragedies in series of philosophical articles, his only research in mathematics was a brief jotted effort to found arithmetic on geometry, rather than logic, indicating his conclusion that his logical program had failed.

Further Reading

A particularly detailed recent example of “neo-Fregean” re-constructions of Frege’s foundations of arithmetic appears in John Burgess’s Princeton, NJ, 2005). Many of the classic papers on the Fixing Frege (Princeton University Press, technical details of reconstructing Frege’s philosophy oflogic are reprinted in Frege’s Philosophy of Mathematics (Harvard University Press, Harvard, MA, 1995) by William Demopoulos.

Jamie Tappenden

VI.57 Christian Felix Klein

b. Düsseldorf, Germany, 1849; d. Göttingen, Germany, 1925 Higher geometry; function theory; theory of algebraic equations; pedagogy Klein had originally intended to be a physicist but during the course of his studies with Julius Plücker in Bonn, with whom he studied both mathematics and physics, he turned to mathematics, receiving his doctorate for athesis on line geometry in 1868. After Plücker’s death in 1868 he went to Göttingen to study with Alfred Cleb-sch, where he worked exclusively on mathematics.
In 1869–70 he spent some months in Berlin studying with weierstrass [VI.44](/part-06/karl-weierstrass-18151897) and kummer [VI.40] before joining After passing his habilitation in Göttingen in 1871, lie [VI.53](/part-06/sophus-lie-18421899) for a trip to Paris to see hermite [VI.47](/part-06/charles-hermite-18221901). he took positions successively at Erlangen, Munich, and Leipzig, returning to Göttingen in 1886, where he remained until he retired (because of poor health) in1913.
In 1875 he married Anna Hegel, a granddaughter of the philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. In 1872 Klein published his celebrated “Erlanger Programm,” a creative and unified conception of geom-etry. Building on a paper of cayley [VI.46](/part-06/arthur-cayley-18211895) of 1859 in which Cayley had shown how to deduceean geometry [I.3 §6.2](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) from projective geometry euclid[I.3 §6.7](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), Klein applied his knowledge of group theory(learned from jordan [VI.52](/part-06/camille-jordan-18381922) in Paris) to create a hierarchy of
all geometries. He had recognized that each geometry could be characterized by a group of transformations and classified accordingly (seedamental mathematical definitions [I.3 §6.1](/part-01/fundamental-definitions)). Thesome fun-

VI. Mathematicians

classification showed, as Klein had anticipated, that ofall the geometries, projective is the most basic and that the others, e.g., affine, hyperbolic, Euclidean, etc., are subsumed at some level beneath it. Moreover, it was clear from his construction that a contradiction ineuclidean geometry [[II.2 §§6–10]](/part-02/geometry) would simultane-nonously involve a contradiction in Euclidean geometry. Klein regarded his work in function theory as his greatest achievement.
As his career progressed, hemoved more and more from Plücker’s and Clebsch’s strictly geometric viewpoint toward the wider out-look embraced by riemann [VI.49], who had regarded analytic functions as given by conformal mappings between given domains. In his “Riemanns Theorie der algebraischen Funktionen und ihrer Integrale” (1882), Klein gave a geometric treatment of function theory in which he fused Riemann’s ideas with the rigorous power-series methods of Weierstrass. Klein’s health broke down.
His attempt to keep upwith In 1882, when he was at the height of his powers, poincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) in the race to develop the theory of automorphic functions (which are generalizations of periodic functions such as trigonometric functions, elliptic functions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem), etc.), during which he had proved his famous Grenzkreis (boundary circle) The-orem, had left him exhausted, and he was never again able to work with such intensity and at such a high level. After his breakdown Klein’s interest shifted progressively from research
toward pedagogy. In his efforts tomodernize mathematical education he developed outstanding organizational skills and initiated important and far-reaching editorial projects ranging from the preparation of lecture notes to coediting the twentyfour-volumes ch af ten (1896–1935). He was an editor of the Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissen-Mathematische Annalen the founding members of the Deutsche Mathematik er-for almost fifty years, and was among Ver einigung (1890).
He also played an active role in establishing mathematical applications in science and engineering, as well as promoting the better under-standing of mathematics by engineers. results in the theory of algebraic equations (through Among Klein’s other achievements were important a consider at i on of the icosahedron he obtained a com-plete theory of the general fifth-degree equation (1884)) and in mechanics, in which, jointly with Arnold Som-merfeld, he developed the theory of the gyroscope (1897–1910).
He also worked on ideas involving the application of group theory to the theory of relativity, producing papers on the lorentz group [IV.13 §1](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations)