# Leopold Kronecker (1823–1891)

VI.48. Leopold Kronecker

Further Reading

Crilly, T. 2006.the Victorian Age Arthur Cayley: Mathematician Laureate of. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Tony Crilly

VI.47 Charles Hermite

b. Dieuze, Moselle, France, 1822; d. Paris, 1901 Analysis (elliptic functions, differential equations); algebra (invariant theory, quadratic forms); approximation theory Like many who aspired to enter the École Polytech-nique, Hermite undertook special preparatory classes, in his case at Lycée Henri IV and Lycée Louis-le-Grand.He began to study serious mathematics, immersing himself in the work ofdre [VI.24](/part-06/adrien-marie-legendre-17521833), and became interested in the solution oflagrange [VI.22](/part-06/joseph-louis-lagrange-17361813) and legen equations by radicals. Admitted to the École Polytechnique in 1842, by the end of that year he had completed his first significant original work. This extended results of jacobi [VI.35](/part-06/carl-gustav-jacob-jacobi-18041851) in the theory of elliptic functions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem). He sent these to Jacobi, who responded very positively. This achievement both brought him recognition in Paris and initiated a correspondence with Jacobion elliptic functions and number theory that launched Hermite’s career. commensurate with his abilities, and for almost adecade survived on teaching assistant and examiner Hermite nonetheless struggled to find a position jobs around Paris. Hermite’s work turned to number theory, in particular the arithmetic of quadratic forms, where he followed ing when one form can be reduced to another by a linear gauss [VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855) and Lagrange in study transformation. It was in this context that thetian matrices [III.50 §3](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties) named after him arose. Her-hermimite was interested in invariants of quadratic forms, and also applied his work to the problem of locationof roots of polynomials. As a result of these efforts, in 1856 he was appointed to the Paris Academy of Sciences, with port ing him. This appointment was quickly followed liouville [VI.39](/part-06/joseph-liouville-18091882) and cauchy [VI.29](/part-06/augustin-louis-cauchy-17891857) supby Hermite’s 1858 discovery of a means to express the solutions of the general fifth-degree polynomial equa-tion in terms of elliptic functions, which earned him widespread international recognition. ence in Paris in 1869, Hermite became an influential Finally obtaining a professorship at the Faculty of Scimentor for a generation of mathematicians, his best-known protégés including J. Tannery, poincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912),

773

E. Picard, P. Appell, and E. Goursat. Hermite’s dynas-tic connections are also impressive: his brother-in-law, Joseph Bertrand, was permanent secretary of the Paris Academy of Sciences, Picard was his son-in-law, Appell married Bertrand’s daughter, and their daughter mar-ried borel [VI.70](/part-06/emile-borel-18711956). His advocacy of improved international communication led to German work becoming much better known in France than it had been previously. During this period, he obtained a proof ofthe transcendence [III.41](/part-03/irrational-and-transcendental-numbers) of “e” using continued fraction approximation theory (which had included the inven-[III.22] methods based on earlier research in tion of the Hermite polynomials). His influence in the mathematical community was strong until his death.

Further Reading

Picard, É. 1901. L’œuvre scientifique de Charles Hermite.Annales Scientifiques de l’École Normale Supérieure (3) 18: 9–34.

Tom Archibald

VI.48 Leopold Kronecker

b. Liegnitz, Silesia, today Poland, 1823; d. Berlin, 1891 Algebra; number theory One of the dominant mathematicians of the second half of the nineteenth century, Kronecker is best known today for his constructivist views and his contributions to number theory. After finishing his Ph.D. under the supervision ofleft Berlin and mathematics in order to manage a fam-dirichlet [VI.36] in 1845, Kronecker ily estate and to wind up his father-in-law’s banking business. These activities left him wealthy and free to return to Berlin and concentrate on mathematics without holding an academic position. In 1855, Kronecker’s former school teacher and closest scientific friend, ernst eduard kummer [VI.40], also came to Berlin and stayed there until his death in 1893. In 1861, Kronecker became a member of the Berlin Academy of Sciences and started teaching courses at Berlin University. Kronecker valued the exchange with his Berlin col-leagues (especially Kummer and weierstrass [VI.44](/part-06/karl-weierstrass-18151897)) highly, until a quarrel arose between Kronecker and Weierstrass in the 1870 s, which drove Weierstrass to bitter, even anti-Semitic, complaints to others about Kronecker. After Kummer’s retirement in 1883, Kronecker occupied Kummer’s chair and stepped up his teaching activities as well as the frequency of his publications. This last active period was cut short when hedied, shortly after the death of his wife.

774

mathematical insight and became increasingly influ-ential through the 1860 s and 1870 s. In 1868, he was Kronecker was renowned for the originality of his offered the chair at Göttingen formerly held by[VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855), and was elected to the Paris Academy. After thegauss Franco-Prussian war of 1870–71, he was invited to rec-ommend mathematicians for the newly opened German university in Strasbourg; and in 1880 he became the managing editor of thewandte Mathematik (otherwise known as Journal für die reine und ange-Crelle’s Journal li shed, or in com pre he ns i ble proofs—). He was often criticized for incomplete, unpub-jordan [VI.52](/part-06/camille-jordan-18381922) spoke of his colleagues’ “envy and despair” with regard to his results. Only in his later years was he explicit about his constructivist methodology. This constituted at least part of the quarrel with Weierstrass, and later prompted hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) to call Kronecker a “Verbotsdiktator” (“forbidding dictator”). Generally affable and hospitable, Kronecker was tough in defending his mathematical ideas and his claims to priority. (in the early 1850 s), he claimed not only the so-called In his first works on solvable algebraic equations Kronecker–Weber theorem (in today’s formulation: every finite Galois extension of the rational num-bers with Abelian galois group [V.21](/part-05/the-insolubility-of-the-quintic) lies in a field generated by roots of unity; the first correct proof of itwas given by Hilbert in 1896), but also a generalization to Abelian extensions of imaginary quadratic fields, which he later called his “liebster Jugendtraum” (“dear-est dream of his youth”). This dream, which was incorrectly translated by Hilbert into his twelfth problem in1900, is today part of class field theory [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871) and the theory of complex multiplication. Such connections between algebra, analysis, and arithmetic continuedto pervade Kronecker’s later work. Important results of Kronecker include class number relations and limit formulas in the theory of elliptic functions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem), the structure theorem for finitely generated abelian groups, and a theory of bilinear forms. braic number theory, but only in 1881 did he pub-lish his “Grundzüge einer arithmetischen Theorie der In the late 1850 s, Kronecker began to work on al ge algebraischen Grössen,” dedicated to Kummer on the fiftieth anniversary of his doctorate. This mathematical testament contains an (incomplete) exposition of a unified arithmetical theory of algebraic numbers and alge-braic functions. As a research program, it adumbrates important aspects of class field theory as well as ofan arithmetico-geometric theory in dimensions higher than one. Kronecker’s concept of “divisor” is equivalent

VI. Mathematicians

to Dedekind’s notion of “ideal” in the case of dedekind domains, but is more restricted in the general case. Several mathematicians, such as H. Weber, K. Hensel, and G. König, took up the “Grundzüge” in their own work. complete arithmetization of pure mathematics, i.e., forthe effective finitary reduction of pure mathematics On a more general level, Kronecker asked for the to the notion of positive integer. For this, he propagated the introduction of indeterminates and equiv-alence relations, a method which he traced back to Gauss. In the case of a finite extension of the rational numbers, for instance, Kronecker is explicitly working with polynomials modulo an irreducible equationf (x) = 0, rather than adjoining a root of it.

Further Reading

Kronecker, L. 1895–1930.Teubner. Werke, five volumes. Leipzig: VlˇFunctionsadu ̧t, S. G. 1991.. New York: Gordon & Breach.Kronecker’s Jugendtraum and Modular Norbert Schappacher and Birgit Petri VI.49 Georg Friedrich Bernhard

Riemann

b. Breselenz, near Dannenberg, Germany, 1826; d. Selasca, Italy, 1866 Real and complex analysis; differential equations; differential geometry; heat distribution; number theory; propagation of shock waves; topology Riemann was born into a poor pastor’s family and stud-ied mathematics at Göttingen, eventually becoming a professor there. His health broke in 1862 and he diednear Lake Maggiore, Italy, of pleurisy at the age of thirty-nine.No mathematician is more associated with the midnineteenth-century transition from algorithmic to con-ceptual thought than Riemann. His doctoral thesis of 1851, and still more his paper on Abelian functions(1857), promoted the view that a holomorphic function riemann equations[I.3 §5.6](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) is properly defined by the[I.3 §5.6](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) and is to be studied cauchy through a close connection with the theory of harmonic functionsa proof of the remarkable[IV.24 §5.1](/part-04/stochastic-processes). In his thesis he sketched riemann mapping theorem [V.34](/part-05/the-uniformization-theorem). This states that ifconnected open subsets in the complex plane, neither X and Y are any two simply of which is the whole plane, then there is a holomorphic map from one to the other with a holomorphic inverse. For example, if you draw any closed curve in

VI.49. Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann

Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann

the plane that does not intersect itself, and let D be the region inside the curve, thencally equivalent to the open unit disk. In the 1857 paper D is bi hol om or ph i- he defined analyze them topologically, and outlined the riemann riemann surfaces [III.79](/part-03/riemann-surfaces), showed how to inequality which his student Gustav Roch improved to the Riemann–Roch theorem, which is of great importance riemann–roch theorem [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) in 1864. (The in algebraic geometry as well as complex analysis, determines the dimension of the space of meromorphic functions on a given Riemann surface with a pre-scribed number of poles.) In 1857 he extended the theory of differential equations, specifically the impor-tant case of the hypergeometric equation, to complex functions. In 1859 he used deep, new ideas from complex function theory to study the (Riemann) zeta func-tion and proposed his celebrated conjecture, the riemann hypothesis of the complex zeros of this function. The conjecture[IV.2 §3](/part-04/number-theory), concerning the location remains unsolved to this day. These ideas enabled mathematicians to study complex functions on domains other than the plane and subsets of the plane. They opened the way to a geometric study of algebraic functions and algebraic curves, and proved to be decisive in the study of the integrals of algebraic functions (the theories of Abelian functions and theta functions of several variables). Investigations of the Riemann zeta function led not only to the discovery of new properties of classes of complex func-

775

tions, but more recently to the use of zeta functionsof many other kinds in other branches of mathematics, including dynamics. let integral In 1854 Riemann, inspired by his mentor[VI.36], formulated the concept of the[I.3 §5.5](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), which permitted him to do pro-riemann di rich found work on the convergence of trigonometric series.Dirichlet had been able to prove that a real function was correctly represented by a Fourier series, but onlyunder very restrictive conditions. This left open the questions of what sorts of functions did not satisfy these conditions and how could they be studied. Riemann reformulated the concept of the integral and wasable to show that it is not just the continuity of a function and the ways in which it may fail to be continuous that affect the accuracy of its Fourier series representation, but the nature of its oscillations. The riemann integral remained the dominant definition of the integral until it was replaced by the lebesgue integral [III.55](/part-03/measures) after 1902, which is better adapted to capturing the way the behavior of a function affects its Fourier series.In a lecture, also given in 1854 (but published posthumously in 1868), he entirely reformulated geometry asbeing about spaces (sets of points, which he called manifolds(an appropriate concept of distance) and argued that[I.3 §6.9](/part-01/fundamental-definitions)) with a riemannian metric [I.3 §6.10](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) the geometric properties of a space were its intrinsic ones. He noted that there are three constant-curvature spaces in two dimensions and showed how the idea ofconstant curvature can be extended to higher dimensions. In passing, he was the first person to write down ametric for non-Euclidean geometry (more than a decade before Beltrami’s publication of 1868, which legitimized non-Euclidean geometry). This lecture earnedhim the right to teach in a German university. and shares with duc ing the methods of complex function theory in the Riemann also did important work on shock waves, weierstrass [VI.44](/part-06/karl-weierstrass-18151897) the honor of intro study ofled to several new solutions of the Plateau problem, minimal surfaces [III.94 §3.1](/part-03/variational-methods), where he was which asks for the surface of least area spanning agiven curve in space. described Riemann’s complex analysis as consisting of “almost cryptic messages to the future” and said The distinguished complex analyst Lars Ahlfors once that his mapping theorem was given in a form that“would defy any attempt at proof, even with modern methods,” and it is true that Riemann’s presentation ismore visionary than precise. But his vision described
