# Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer (1881–1966)

VI.75. Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer

with his study of integral equations, a topic then being developed by Riesz found these two theorems partly in connection hilbert [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943), and partly in connection with his study of functional analysis as formulated by Maurice Fréchet. Hilbert’s work had led him to consider infinite matrices, which were then little studied:
Riesz wrote the first monograph on them, Les Systèmes d’Équations Linéaires à une Infinité d’Inconnues He also studied the theory of$L^{p} \text{spaces for} p >(1913)$.1 (that is, spaces of functionsf such that fp is measure- integrable over some specified interval) and their dual spaces$L^{q}$, where 1/p + 1/q =1; and he worked on applying his and Fischer’s theorem to the self-dualspace, now known as hilbert space [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis), that is given byp = 2.
Later he laid some of the foundations of complete spaces (later known as[III.62](/part-03/normed-spaces-and-banach-spaces)), and applied functional analysis to ergodic banach spaces theory. He summed up much of his work in theseareas in the book Leçons d’Analyse Fonctionnelle (1952), written with his student B. Szökefnalvy-Nagy. All this work constituted important contributions to theories already laid out in principle by various other mathematicians. Riesz achieved groundbreaking work on subharmonic functions:
he modified thelet problem [IV.12 §1](/part-04/analysis) by allowing the function that di rich extends a given function into a domain to be subhar-monic (“locally less than harmonic”) instead of harmonic. He studied some of the applications of these functions to potential theory. theory, especially types of ordering, continuity, and generalized Heine–Borel covering theorems.
He also Riesz also studied some foundational aspects of set reformulated the struc tive manner, using step functions and sets of mea-lebesgue integral [III.55](/part-03/measures) in a consure zero as primitive notions, and avoiding theory [III.55](/part-03/measures) as much as possible. measure

Further Reading

Riesz, F. 1960.volumes. Budapest: Akademiai Kiado. Oeuvres Complètes, edited by Á. Császár, two Ivor Grattan-Guinness VI.75 Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer b. Overschie, the Netherlands, 1881; d. Blaricum, the Netherlands, 1966 Lie groups; topology; geometry; intuitionistic mathematics; philosophy of mathematics Brouwer entered the University of Amsterdam at theage of sixteen, where his teacher was D. J. Korteweg.

799

The young Brouwer taught himself modern mathemat-ics, as well as a fair amount of philosophy. As a graduate student he published some original papers on the decomposition of rotations in four-dimensional space. He also published a brief monograph on mysticism that contained a number of ideas that became prominentin his later philosophy.
In his dissertation of 1907 he solved a special case of(the elimination of differentiabili ty conditions from the hilbert’s [VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) fifth problem axioms offirst program for “constructive mathematics.”lie groups [III.48 §1](/part-03/lie-theory)), and he presented his of mathematics The basis of his mathematics was the: the continuum and the natural num-ur-intuition bers are simultaneously created from intuition. Mathe-matical objects (including proofs) are mental creations.
After sketching the development of the basic parts of mathematics, Brouwer went on to criticize contemporary mathematics for transcending the bounds of the human mind. In particular, he criticized for introducing sets beyond human recognition, andcantor [VI.54](/part-06/georg-cantor-18451918) Hilbert for the axiomatic method and for formalism.
he criticized the latter’s consistency program and denied that “consistency implies existence.” principles,” Brouwer explicitly rejected the principle ofthe excluded middle as unreliable (and also rejected In his 1908 paper “The unreliability of the logical Hilbert’s dogma that “all mathematical problems can besolved in one way or another”). Between 1909 and 1913 Brouwer worked in topology.
He continued his workon Lie groups, and noted that topology (in the style of Cantor–Schoenflies) was in need of a sound basis. In his paper “Zur Analysis Situs” (1910), he spelled out a number of notions and examples (curves, indecomposable continua, three domains with one common boundary). This was the beginning of his revision of set-theoretic topology. At the same time he started twolines of research:
one on homeomorphisms from surfaces to themselves, establishing rems [V.11](/part-05/fixed-point-theorems) on the sphere and thefixed point theo-plane translation theorem Euclidean plane that have no fixed points); and one on(a character ization of homeomorphisms of the vector distributions on the sphere, yielding existence theorems for singular points, and a character ization of these points. The best-known theorem in this area is Brouwer’s “hairy ball theorem” (no matter how onecombs a hairy ball, there is always a crown).
In 1910 Brouwer published a direct topological proof of the Jor-dan curve theorem, which remains one of the most elegant proofs. The so-called new topology opened with Brouwer’s “invariance of dimension” theorem (1910).