# Norbert Wiener (1894–1964)

VI.85. Norbert Wiener

the influence has been. Banach also introduced the notions banach–tarski paradox [V.3](/part-05/the-banachtarski-paradox) show how wide his of dual space [III.19](/part-03/duality), dual operator, and the general concepts of weak and weak-star convergence, and heused all of these notions in linear operator equations. at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Oslo, where he described the work of the whole Lwów In 1936, Banach delivered a one-hour plenary address school. In 1937 Norbert Wiener tried to lure him to the United States. In 1939 he was elected presidentof the Polish Mathematical Society and was awarded a Grand Prize of the Polish Academy of Knowledge.Banach spent the war years in Lwów. During the years 1940–41 and 1944–45 he was the Dean of the Faculty of Science at the renamed Iwan Franko State University.In the period 1941–44 Lwów was occupied by the German army. During this period Banach was saved from almost certain death by the action of Rudolf Weigel, a “Schindleresque” factory owner and inventor of thetyphus vaccine, who gave him employment at his Bacteriological Institute as a louse feeder. After the war, heaccepted a chair at the Jagiellonian University. He died on August 31, 1945, in Lwów of lung cancer at the ageof fifty-three. The complete list of Banach’s publications comprises fifty-eight items, and they were reprinted in Banach’s Collected Works (published in two volumes in 1967 and 1979). Banach said, “Mathematics is the most beauti-ful and most powerful creation of the human spirit. Mathematics is as old as Man.” Banach is considered a national hero in Poland, as a great scientist and a major figure in the great flowering of Polish scientific life in the independent Poland of the interwar years.

Further Reading

Banach, S. 1967, 1996.Kaluza, R. 1996. The Life of Stefan Banach Oeuvres, two volumes. Warsaw: PWN.. Basel: Birkhäuser.

Lech Maligranda

VI.85 Norbert Wiener

b. Columbia, Missouri, 1894; d. Stockholm, 1964 Stochastic processes; applications to electrical engineering and physiology; harmonic analysis; cybernetics Wiener was just eighteen years old when, in 1913, hewas awarded a Ph.D. in logic while studying under Josiah Royce at Harvard University. Afterward, he studied with, among others,[VI.73](/part-06/godfrey-harold-hardy-18771947) in Cambridge and hilbert russell[VI.63](/part-06/david-hilbert-18621943) in Göttingen.[VI.71](/part-06/bertrand-arthur-william-russell-18721970) and hardy

811

After doing work on ballistics for the military during World War II, he was appointed instructor of mathematics at the fledgling Massachusetts Institute of Technol-ogy in Cambridge, MA, where he remained for the rest of his career. Wiener was in many respects a nonconformist, certainly scientifically and mathematically, but also social-ly, culturally, politically, and philosophically. He was a precocious child and his home education by his father(a noted linguist and Harvard professor), along with his Jewish background in a society still stricken by anti-Semitism, made his nonconformism almost inevitable. Garrett Birkhoff, the son ofsaid the following in 1977: george birkhoff [VI.78](/part-06/george-birkho-18841944), Wiener was notable as one of the few Americans ofhis time who was outstanding in both pure mathematics and its applications. How much of this can be attributed to his varied and cosmopolitan early background, and how much to his continuing contacts withnon-mathematicians ... it is hard to say. largely self-sufficient and was still in a phase in which During a period in which American mathematics was interdisciplina ry approaches were generally ignored, Wiener was reaching out to European mathematics and collaborating with engineers such as Vannevar Bush. This attitude also affected his choices of research topics, even within pure mathematics: he worked onwhatever took his fancy. In a talk in 1938, George Birkhoff described Wiener’s work on Tauberian the-orems as an example of “exercising talent for free invention,” contrasting this with the typically american approach: “mathematics as serious business.” Wiener’s way of connecting pure and applied mathematics did not follow the usual path of taking old problems of applied mathematics (such as in classical mechanics and electrical engineering) and tack-ling them with new, and rigorously sharpened, mathematical tools. Rather the opposite: Wiener used someof the newest, and much debated, results of pure mathematics—such as the Fourier transformations in the complex domain, and lebesgue integral [III.55](/part-03/measures), stochastic processesto several of the newest physical, technological, and[IV.24](/part-04/stochastic-processes)—and connected them biological problems. The types of problem he attacked included those of brownian motion [IV.24](/part-04/stochastic-processes), quantum mechanics, radio astronomy, anti-aircraft fire control, noise filtration in radar, the nervous system, and the theory of automata.
