# Pafnuty Chebyshev (1821–1894)

VI.45. Pafnuty Chebyshev

analysis (until later). He also defined the real numbers based on the robinson [VI.95](/part-06/abraham-robinson-19181974) some hundred years rationals (although Dedekind’s and cantor’s [VI.54](/part-06/georg-cantor-18451918) approaches proved more accessible). He was there by largely responsible for the “arithmetization of analysis” (a term coined byable contributions to real analysis are his introduction klein [VI.57]). Among his remark of uniform convergence (introduced independently by P. L.
Seidel) and his example of an every where-contin-uous and no where-differentiable function (Cauchy and his contemporaries believed that a continuous function was differentiable except possibly at isolated points). Both riemann [VI.49] and Weierstrass (succeeding Cauchy) founded complex function theory, but they had fundamentally different approaches to the subject.
Riemann’s global, geometric conception was based onthe notion of a riemann surface [III.79](/part-03/riemann-surfaces) and on the dirichlet principle [IV.12 §3.5](/part-04/analysis), while Weierstrass’s local algebraic theory was grounded in power series and analytic continuation [I.3 §5.6](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). “The more I ponder the principles of function theory—and I do so incessantly—the more I am convinced that it must be founded on simple algebraic truths. . .,” he asserted in a letter to H. A. Schwartz.
He severely criticized the Dirichlet principle for being mathematically not wellgrounded, and produced a counterexample, after which his approach to complex analysis became dominant until the early twentieth century. Klein commented on Weierstrass’s general approach to mathematics: “[He]is first of all a logician; he proceeds slowly, systematically, step-by-step.
When he works, he strives for the definitive form.” Weierstrass’s name is attached to various concepts and results, among them the theorem, which says that a continuous function can be Weierstrass approximation uniformly approximated by polynomials; the Weierstrass theorem, which states that every infinite, bolzano bounded set of real numbers has a limit point; the Weierstrass factorization theorem re sent at i on of an entire function in terms of an infinite, which gives the rep product of “prime functions”;
the theorem, which says that in every neighborhood of an Casorati–Weierstrass isolated essential singularity an analytic function takes values arbitrarily close to any assigned complex num-ber; the Weierstrass M-test, which deals with the com- paris on of series for convergence; and the℘-function, an example of an elliptic function Weierstrass[V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem) of order 2. functions, and much of his fame in the nineteenth cen-Weierstrass was most proud of his work on Abelian

771

tury rested on it. His results in this field are, however, less significant today. For us, his main legacy is his unrelenting insistence on maintaining high standards of rigor and seeking the fundamental ideas underlying mathematical concepts and theories.

Further Reading

Bottazzini, U. 1986.and Complex Analysis from Euler to Weierstrass The Higher Calculus: A History of Real. New York: Springer.

Israel Kleiner

VI.45 Pafnuty Chebyshev

b. Okatovo, Russia, 1821; d. Saint Petersburg, Russia, 1894 Assistant, Extraordinary then full Professor of Mathematics, Saint Petersburg (1847–82); Artillery Committee (1856); Scientific Committee of the Ministry of Education (1856) Fascinated by Watt’s parallelogram (the linkage used in steam engines) and the problem of converting circular motion into rectilinear motion, Chebyshev embarkedon a deep study of the theory of hinge mechanisms. In particular, he sought the linkage that would produce the minimum deviation from a straight line over a given range.
This corresponds to the mathematical problem of finding, from among the class of functions chosen to approximate a given function, the one with the smallest absolute error for all specified values of the argument. It was in this context, in particular considering the approximation of functions by polynomials, that Chebyshev discovered the polynomials now named after him (see [III.85](/part-03/special-functions)).
These polynomials were first published in his memoir “Théorie des mécanismes connus sous le nom de parallélogrammes” (1854), and they marked the beginning of his important contributions tothe theory of orthogonal polynomials. bynomials also satisfy the recurrence relation Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind are defined$T^{n}(\cos θ) = \cos (nθ)$, for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . These poly - T (x) = 2 xx T.
Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind satisfy^n(2) - T^n^-^1(x), where T0(x) = 1 andn (T + 1)1(x) =Urelationn(. os θ)U = (x). in ((n = 2 x U + 1)θ)/(x)-. in U θ and the recurrence(x)$, where U (x) =$1 and U1(x()n)+1 = 2 x.n n - 1 0 Chebyshev also had a significant impact on number theory, coming close to proving the theorem [V.26](/part - 05/the - prime - number - theorem - and - the - vi34 - jnos - bolyai - 18021860). In probability he is remembered for prime number Chebyshev’s inequality, a result that is simple but has innumerable applications.