# Sofya (Sonya) Kovalevskaya (1850–1891)

784

ρinvertible matrices over:$G \to GL^{n}(C)$, where GLC), the associated charactern(C) is the group of n . imes  nχ is the mapg \in  G. Frobenius proved the orthogonality relations, G \to  C such that χ(g) = trace ρ(g) for recognized the connection of his characters with matrix representations of the group, calculated the character tables of the symmetric groups, the alternating groups, and the Mathieu groups, and used properties of induced characters to prove his famous theorem that atransitive permutation group in which no element other than the identity fixes two or more points has a
regu-lar normal subgroup (that is, a subgroup consisting of the identity together with the fixed-point-free elementsof the group). To this day no purely group-theoretic proof of this theorem has been found. In recognition of his contribution such groups are now called Frobenius groups. Through character theory and representa-tion theory, as developed by Frobenius for finite groups (and by his pupil, friend, and colleague Issai Schur for classical matrix groups), group theory found important applications in physics and chemistry a generation later.

Further Reading

Begehr, H., ed. 1998.Dokumentation, two volumes. Aachen: Shaker. Mathematik in Berlin: Geschichte und Curtis, C. W. 1999.nius, Burnside, Schur, and Brauer Pioneers of Representation Theory: Frobe-. Providence, RI: Ameri Serre, J.-P., ed. 1968.can Mathematical Society.lungen, three volumes. Berlin: Springer. F. G. Frobenius: Gesammelte Abhand Peter M. Neumann VI.59 Sofya (Sonya) Kovalevskaya b. Moscow, 1850; d. Stockholm, 1891 Partial differential equations;
Abelian integrals Kovalevskaya showed talent for mathematics at anearly age but as a woman in mid-nineteenth-century Russia she was denied access to university. Unable toleave the country unescorted she married and in 1869 traveled to Heidelberg, where she was taught mathe-matics by Du Bois-Reymond. The following year she moved to Berlin to work with Berlin University was closed to women but weierstrass weierstrass [VI.44](/part-06/karl-weierstrass-18151897). agreed to tutor her privately.
Under his supervision Kovalevskaya completed dissertations on partial differential equations (PDEs), Abelian integrals, and Sat-urn’s rings, and in 1874 she became the first woman to receive a doctorate in mathematics. The dissertation

VI. Mathematicians

on PDEs, which excited particular attention, contained the result now known as the cauchy–kovalevskaya theorem [[IV.12 §§2.2, 2.4]](/part-04/partial-di-erential-equations), an important tool in establishing the existence of analytic solutions of PDEs. That same year Kovalevskaya returned to Russia and, unable to find a suitable position, temporarily aban-doned mathematics. In 1880, at the invitation of chebyshev [VI.45](/part-06/pafnuty-chebyshev-18211894), she gave a paper on Abelian integrals at a conference in Saint Petersburg.
It was enthusiasticall yreceived and in 1881 she returned to Berlin. She saw Weierstrass frequently and devoted herself to the studyof the propagation of light in a crystalline medium— a subject to which she had been led by studying the work of the French physicist Gabriel Lamé—and to thestudy of the rotation of a solid body about a fixed point. Later that year she moved to Paris to work with mathematicians there. In 1883, championed by Mittag-Leffler, Kovalevskaya was appointed as a Privatdozent at the University of Stockholm.
She also became an editor of Acta mathematica of a scientific journal. On behalf of, making her the first woman to join the board Acta she liaised with mathematicians from Paris, Berlin, and Russia, providing an important link between Russian math-ematicians and their western European counterparts. She continued to work on the rotation problem andin 1885 made the breakthrough that, three years later, would win her the prestigious Prix Bordin of the French Academy of Sciences. Prior to her work the problem had been completely solved for only two cases, both symmetrical.
In the first, solved bycenter of gravity of the moving body coincides with theeuler [VI.19](/part-06/leonhard-euler-17071783), the fixed point; and in the second, solved by lagrange [VI.22](/part-06/joseph-louis-lagrange-17361813), the center of gravity and the fixed point lieon the same axis. Kovalevskaya discovered that there was a third case, one that was asymmetrical and more complicated than the other two, which could also be solved completely.
(It was later shown that there are no others.) The novelty of her results lay in her application of the recently developed theory of theta functions—the simplest elements from which functions [V.31](/part - 05/the - riemannroch - theorem) can be constructed—to solve abelian elliptic integrals. ics at the University of Stockholm in 1889, the first woman anywhere to achieve such a position.
Shortly Kovalevskaya became a full professor of mathemat afterward, she was nominated by Chebyshev for cor - responding membership of the Russian Academy of Sciences, her subsequent election breaking the gender barrier once again.