# Sophus Lie (1842–1899)

VI.53. Sophus Lie

wave equation for the vibrations of an elliptical mem-brane. These functions, which are special cases of the hypergeometric function, are particular solutions of Mathieu’s equation: d2$u+ (a + 16q cos 2z)u = 0$,$d$ z2

where physical problem.a and q are constants that depend on the Mathieu is also known for his discovery of the five Mathieu groups. These were the first groups [V.7](/part-05/the-classication-of-finite-simple-groups) (meaning that they did not fit into one sporadic simple of the known infinite families of simple groups) to be found. It is now known that there are twenty-six such groups altogether, although it was almost a century after Mathieu before a sixth one was found. VI.52 Camille Jordan b. Lyon, France, 1838; d. Milan, Italy, 1922 Nominally an engineer until 1885;
teacher of mathematics, École Polytechnique and Collège de France (1873–1912) Jordan was the leading group theorist of his genera-tion. His immense Traité des Substitutions et des Équations Algébriqueshis earlier results on(1870), which brought together all permutation groups [III.68](/part - 03/permutation - groups) and provided a synthesis ofremained a cornerstone for group theorists for many galois’s [VI.41](/part - 06/variste - galois - 18111832) ideas, years.
Included in the calls linear substitutions (now written in matrix form Traité, in the chapter on what he as$y = Ax$), is the definition of what today is called the jordan normal form [III.43](/part - 03/jordan - normal - form) of a matrix, although in 1868 equivalent normal form.weierstrass [VI.44](/part - 06/karl - weierstrass - 18151897) had already defined an cially for the theorem now known as the theorem Jordan is also known for his work in topology, espe-.
This states that a simple closed curve in the Jordan curve plane separates the plane into two disjoint regions, an inside and an out side, and it was given by him in his influential Cours d’Analyse (1887). Although the theorem appears obvious, the proof, as Jordan recognized, is difficult and the one he gave was in correct. (The proof is relatively easy for smooth curves; the diff i cul-ties arise when dealing with no where-smooth curves, such as the Koch snowflake.) The first rigorous proof was given by Oswald Veblen in 1905.
There is a stronger form of the theorem, known as the Jordan–Schönfliestheorem, which states that in addition the two regions of the plane, the inside and the out side, are homeo-morphic to the standard circle in the plane. Unlike the original theorem, this stronger form of the theorem 777 cannot be generalized to higher dimensions, a famous counterexample being the Alexander horned sphere. VI.53 Sophus Lie b. Nordfjordeid (western Norway), 1842; d. Oslo, 1899 Transformation groups; Lie groups;
partial differential equations Lie was twenty-six when he discovered that, in his own words, he “harbored a mathematician.” Before then he had primarily wanted to be an observational astronomer. Later in life, looking back on his career, he said that it was the “audacity of his thinking” more than any formal knowledge and education that had given him a position among the fore most of mathematicians. During a career spanning more than thirty years, Lie produced almost eight thousand pages of mathematics, making him one of the most productive mathematicians of his time.
in Oslo in 1865 but with out showing any special apti-tude for mathematics. It was not until 1868, when he Lie graduated in general science from the university attended a lecture by the Danish geometer Hieronymus Zeuthen on the work of Chasles, and Plücker, that he became inspired by modern geom - möbius [VI.30](/part - 06/august - ferdinand - mbius - 17901868), etry. He studied the works of Poncelet (projective geom - etry) and Plücker (line geometry), and wrote a dissertation on “imaginary geometry,” that is, geometry based on complex numbers.
In the fall of 1869 he traveled to Berlin, Göttingen, and Paris, where he met mathe-maticians who would remain friends and colleagues for the rest of his life. In Berlin he met Göttingen he met Clebsch, and in Paris, where he was klein [VI.57], in joined by Klein, he met Darboux and These two had a particular influence on him—darboux jordan [VI.52](/part - 06/camille - jordan - 18381922).
through his theory of surfaces and Jordan through his knowledge of group theory and the work of galois [VI.41](/part - 06/variste - galois - 18111832)—with the result that he (and Klein) began torecognize the value of group theory for the study of geometry. Lie and Klein published three joint papers on geometrical topics, including one on the so-called Lie line–sphere transformation (the contact trans for - mation, which is a transformation that maps straight lines into spheres and principal tangent curves into curvature lines;
and then the study of the geometrical entities that are invariant under such transformations). “Erlanger Programm” (his character ization of geometryas properties invariant under a group action), Lie was When Klein prepared what was to become his famous with him. This work later created a deep rift between them. (Friendship turned into aloofness and hostility