# Stefan Banach (1892–1945)

VI.84. Stefan Banach

affectionately known as the “Yellow Peril.” The third volume in this series is Courant’s exposition of riemann’s [VI.49] geometric view of the theory of analytic functions, combined with Hurwitz’s lectures onelliptic functions [V.31](/part-05/the-riemannroch-theorem). In 1924 the first volume of Courant–Hilbert onit contained, presciently, much of the mathematics Mathematical Physics appeared; needed for Schrödinger’s version of quantum mechanics. His influential calculus book appeared in 1927. His research did not languish;
in 1928 he published, jointly with his students Friedrichs and Lewy, the basic paper on the difference equations of mathematical physics. Under Courant’s leadership, Göttingen, where the lively international atmosphere had been destroyed by World War I, became once again an important center for mathematics, as well as physics: the list of visi-tors reads like a Who’s Who of mathematics. This was totally shattered when Hitler took over the government: Jewish professors, Courant among the first, were dis-missed unceremoniously and had to flee or face annihilation.
Courant and his family found refuge in New York, where he was invited to build a Graduate School of Mathematics at New York University (NYU). With out any foundation to build on, Courant succeeded in this task, with the help of his former student Friedrichs and of the American James Stoker, who shared Courant’sscientific ideals.
Courant found New York a reservoir of talent, and attracted students such as Max Shiffman, and later Harold Grad, Joe Keller, Martin Kruskal, Cath-leen Morawetz, Louis Nirenberg, and others, including the writer of this article. In 1936, in a burst of creativity, Courant obtained several basic results about minimal surfaces [III.94 §3.1](/part-03/variational-methods) using Dirichlet’s principle. In 1937 he finished the sec-ond volume of Courant–Hilbert. The immensely successful popular book he wrote jointly with Herb Rob-bins, What Is Mathematics?, appeared in 1940.
In 1942 when federal financing for scientific research became available, Courant’s group embarked on an ambitious study of supersonic flow and shock waves. enabled Courant to vastly expand the scale of research and graduate instruction at NYU. The research com-Federal support did not stop after the war; this bined, at a high intellectual level, theoretical mathe-matics with applications such as fluid dynamics, statistical mechanics, the theory of elasticity, meteorology, the numerical solution of partial differential equations, and other topics.
Nothing like this had been attempted before at a university in the United States. The insti-tute created by Courant, eventually named after him, is

809

flourishing today and has served as a model for other centers around the world. Germans; after the war he helped to rebuild mathemat-ics in Germany and was instrumental in inviting tal-Courant hated the Nazis, but did not condemn all ented young German mathematicians and physicists to the United States. Courant received much help from friends of his youth, many of whom became leaders in their fields, aswell as from science administrators in government and industry who admired his vision of mathematics andthe gallant spirit that was demonstrated by his willingness to fight against seemingly
insuperable odds.

Further Reading

Reid, C. 1976.of an Improbable Mathematician Courant in Göttingen and New York: The Story. New York: Springer. Peter D. Lax VI.84 Stefan Banach b. Kraków, Poland, 1892; d. Lwów, Poland, 1945 Functional analysis; real analysis; measure theory; orthogonal series; set theory; topology Banach was the son of Katarzyna Banach and Stefan Greczek. As his parents were unmarried and his mother was too poor to support her son, he was brought up mainly in Kraków by a foster mother, Franciszka Płowa. enrolled at the Lwów Polytechnic in the Faculty of Engi-neering.
Two years after his studies were interrupted After graduating from high school in 1910, Banach by the out break of World War I, Banach returned to Kraków, where on a summer evening in 1916 he was “discovered” by Hugo Steinhaus, who over heard the words “Lebesgue integral” and brought him to Lwów.
Steinhaus considered this event as his “greatest math-ematical discovery.” It was also through Steinhaus that Banach met his future wife, Łucja Braus, whom he married in 1920.In the same year Professor Antoni Łomnicki engaged Banach as his assistant at the Lwów Polytechnic, even though Banach had not yet finished his studies. This was the beginning of the meteoric rise of Banach’sscientific career. tion, “On operations on abstract sets and their applica-In June 1920 Banach defended his doctoral dissertation to integral equations,” at the Jan Kazimierz Univer-sity in Lwów.
His dissertation was written in Polish and published in 1922 in French. In his thesis Banach intro-duced the concept of complete normed linear spaces,