# Thoralf Skolem (1887–1963)

806

mathematics around the middle of the 1920 s with Weyl made his most influential contributions to pure his work on the semisimple Lie groups. combining representation theory cartan’s [VI.69](/part-06/lie-joseph-cartan-18691951)[IV.9](/part-04/representation-theory) of insights into the representation theory of lie algebras and Schur, Weyl used his knowledge of the topology of[III.48 §2](/part-03/lie-theory) with methods developed by Hurwitz manifolds and developed the core of the general theory of representations of Lie groups in a blend of geo-metric, algebraic, and analytic methods.
He extended and refined this work and it formed the core of his later book his work and lectures on this topic during his Prince-The Classical Groups (1939)—a harvest of ton years. Along with all this work, Weyl actively followed the rise of the new quantum mechanics. In 1927–28 hegave a lecture course at ETH on the topic, which gave rise to his next book on mathematical physics, Group Theory and Quantum mechanics sized the conceptual role of group methods in the sym-(1928).
Weyl emphabolic representation of quantum structures, in particular the intriguing interplay between representations of the special linear group and permutation groups [III.68](/part-03/permutation-groups). A second step in his gauge theory of the electromagnetic field was published separately, which gave rise to a modified gauge theory of ele ct ro magnetism. This was endorsed by leading theoretical physicists, including Pauli, Schrödinger, and Fock. It served as a starting point for the next generation of physicists who developed gauge field theories in the 1950 s and 1960 s.
Weyl’s research in mathematics and physics was shaped by his philosophical out look and he included his philosophical reflections on scientific activity in many of his publications. Most influential was his contribution to a philosophical handbook, Mathematics and Natural Science, originally published Philosophy of in German in 1927 and translated into English in 1949. It became a classic in the philosophy of science.

Further Reading

Chandrasekharan, K., ed. 1986.Centenary Lectures delivered by C. N. Yang, R. Penrose, Hermann Weyl: 1885–1985. and A. Borel at the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich. Berlin: Springer. Deppert, W., K. Hübner, A. Oberschelp, and V. Weidemann, eds. 1988. Exact Sciences and Their Philosophical Founda Hawkins, T. 2000.tions An Essay in the History of Mathematics 1869–1926. Frankfurt: Peter Lang. Emergence of the Theory of Lie Groups.. Berlin: Springer.

VI. Mathematicians

Scholz, E., ed. 2001.and a General Introduction to His Scientific Work Hermann Weyl’s Raum–Zeit–Materie. Basel: Weyl, H. 1968.Birkhäuser. Chandrasekharan, four volumes. Berlin: Springer. Gesammelte Abhandlungen, edited by K.

Erhard Scholz

VI.81 Thoralf Skolem

b. Sandsvaer, Norway, 1887; d. Oslo, 1963 Mathematical logic Thoralf Skolem was one of the major logicians of the twentieth century, often a lone voice in his under-standing of the subtle relationship between abstract set theory and logic. He also worked on diophantine equations and on group theory, but his contributions to mathematical logic have proved the most lasting. He taught at Bergen and Oslo, was for a time President of the Norwegian Mathematical Society and an editor ofits journal, and in 1954 was named a Knight of the First Class in the Royal Order of St. Olav by the kingof Norway.
Polish mathematician Leopold Löwenheim. His conclu-In 1915 Skolem extended a result obtained by the sion (published in 1920 and known as the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem) says that if a mathematical theory defined using only the first-order predicate calculus hasa model [IV.23 §1](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory), then it has a countable model. Here a model is a set of mathematical objects that obeys the axioms of the theory. Now, the real numbers are definable in such a theory (for example, set theory [IV.22 §3](/part-04/set-theory), or any other axioms for set zermelo–fraenkel theory).
From this we obtain the so-called Skolem para-dox, that the real numbers can be defined in a theory with a countable model, even though it had been known since the time ofare uncountable. How can this paradox be resolved?cantor [VI.54](/part-06/georg-cantor-18451918) that the real numbers what we mean by “countable.” In this strange count-able model of set theory, we can see that the reals are The answer is that one has to be very careful about countable, but to the model the reals may be uncountable.
In other words, the actual enumeration of the reals that we can see (i.e., the actual bijection between the reals and the natural numbers) may not belong to the model: the model can be so “small” that it is missing some functions. Skolem’s paradox highlights the dif-ference between the viewpoint from out side the model and that from Several fundamental aspects of Skolem’s work are inside the model. visible in these two results, the Löwenheim–Skolem