# Wacław Sierpiński (1882–1969)

VI.77. Wacław Sierpi ́nski

real numbers, or complex numbers, and polynomials using them, she would study any system satisfying abstract rules such as the group axioms [I.3 §2.1](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). Concrete examples include ring axioms [III.81](/part-03/rings-ideals-and-modules) or the the ring of all algebraic functions defined on a space(such as a sphere), and the group of all symmetries of a given space. She largely created the now-standard style of abstract algebra.
Her ideas were also adopted in algebraic geometry appears as the ring of functions on a corresponding[IV.4](/part-04/algebra) where every abstract ring space called a She turned her attention away from operations on scheme [IV.5 §3](/part-04/arithmetic-geometry). elements of a system, like plus and times, and focused instead on relating whole systems to each other, such as rings from R Rto, RR^ related by ring. She organized all algebra around her homomorphisms[I.3 §4.1](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) homomorphism and isomorphism theorems.
Her aimwas to show how ideals [III.81 §2](/part-03/rings-ideals-and-modules) and their corresponding homomorphisms could replace equations between elements as the basic tools for stating and proving theorems. (This approach was to come tofruition in the 1950 s, with the advent of grothendieck style homological algebra.)Topologists studied topological spaces [III.90](/part-03/topological-spaces) by looking at continuous functions from one space to another. Noether saw how her algebraic methods could apply here, and convinced young topologists in the1920 s to use them in algebraic topology.
Each topological space with the property that continuous functions from S has homology groups[IV.6 §4](/part-04/algebraic-topology)HSnto SSTheorems of topology follow by abstract algebra. This^  induce group homomorphisms from Hn S to Hn S^ . relationship between homomorphisms and continuous functions is what inspired category theory [III.8](/part-03/categories). theory theory of groups acting on rings.
The applications are In the 1930 s Noether pursued the algebra of[V.21](/part-05/the-insolubility-of-the-quintic) through a radically simplified abstract galois quite arcane, beginning with and eventually growing into group cohomology and class field theory [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871) many other algebraic and topological methods used in arithmetic geometry [IV.5](/part-04/arithmetic-geometry). following surgery in the United States, at the height ofher creative power. Exiled from Germany by the Nazis in 1933, she died

Further Reading

Brewer, J., and M. Smith, eds. 1981.to Her Life and Work. New York: Marcel Dekker. Emmy Noether: A Tribute Feynman, R. 1965.bridge, MA: MIT Press. The Character of Physical Law. Cam Colin Mc Larty

801

VI.77 Wacław Sierpi ́nski

b. Warsaw, 1882; d. Warsaw, 1969 Number theory; set theory; real functions; topology Sierpi ́sity in Warsaw under the guidance of Georgii Voronoi.nski studied mathematics at the Russian univer In his first paper (1906), he improved gauss’s [VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855) estimate for the difference between the number of lat-tice points inside the circlex2 + y2 ⩽ N and the area of the circle, showing that it is O((N1()/){3}).
of Lwów in 1910, at which point his interest shifted He became an associate professor at the University to set theory, on which he wrote a textbook in 1912, only the fifth book ever to be published on the subject. His first important results on set theory were obtained during World War I, which he spent in Russia: in 191516 he constructed two curves that were among the first published examples of fractals, one known now as Sierpi ́nski’s gasket and the other as Sierpi ́nski’s carpet.
The latter is the set of all points[0, 1]^2 such that, when written out as base 3 decimals,(x, y) in the square there is no position in which both It is also known as Sierpi ́nski’s universal curve, since itx and y have a 1. contains a homeomorphic image of every planar contin-uum (a continuum is a compact connected set) with out interior points. setsbe Borel.
Together with Lusin, Sierpi ́In 1917, Souslin had shown that projections of[III.55](/part-03/measures) (from the plane into the line, say) need notnski proved in 1918 borel that in fact every analytic set (a projection of a Borel set) is the intersection ofא Borel sets (where א is the smallest uncountable cardinal). That same year healso published an important study of1 the axiom of1 choice analysis, and proved that no continuum can be decom-[III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice) and the role it plays in set theory and posed into countably many pairwise disjoint nonempty closed subsets.
In 1919 Sierpi ́nski was made a full professor at the new Polish University of Warsaw and in 1920 he founded (together with Janiszewski and Mazurkiewicz) the first specialized mathematical journal, Mathematicae, which was devoted to set theory, topol-Fundamenta ogy, and applications. He remained its editor until

1951. Among his results published in volume 1 are aproof that every countable subset of Rn with out iso- lated points is homeomorphic to the rationals; a com-plete classification of countable compact subsets of Rn, obtained jointly with Mazurkiewicz; and a necessary