# Wacław Sierpiński (1882–1969)

$VI$ . $77$ .

Wacław Sierpiński

real numbers, or complex numbers, and polynomials using them, she would study any system satisfying abstract rules such as the ring axioms [III.81](/part-03/rings-ideals-and-modules) or the group axioms [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). Concrete examples include the ring of all algebraic functions defined on a space (such as a sphere), and the group of all symmetries of a given space. She largely created the now-standard style of abstract algebra.
Her ideas were also adopted in algebraic geometry [IV.4](/part-04/algebra) where every abstract ring appears as the ring of functions on a corresponding space called a scheme [IV.5](/part-04/arithmetic-geometry). She turned her attention away from operations on elements of a system, like plus and times, and focused instead on relating whole systems to each other, such as rings  R, R related by ring homomorphisms [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) from R to R . She organized all algebra around her homomorphism and isomorphism theorems.
Her aim was to show how ideals [III.81](/part-03/rings-ideals-and-modules) and their corresponding homomorphisms could replace equations between elements as the basic tools for stating and proving theorems. (This approach was to come to fruition in the $1950s$ , with the advent of Grothendieck style homological algebra .) Topologists studied topological spaces [III.90](/part-03/topological-spaces) by looking at continuous functions from one space to another. Noether saw how her algebraic methods could apply here, and convinced young topologists in the $1920s$ to use them in algebraic topology.
 Each topological space S has homology groups [IV.6](/part-04/algebraic-topology) H n S with the property that continuous functions from S to S induce group homomorphisms from H n S to H n S . Theorems of topology follow by abstract algebra. This relationship between homomorphisms and continuous functions is what inspired category theory [III.8](/part-03/categories). In the $1930s$ Noether pursued the algebra of galois theory [V.21](/part-05/the-insolubility-of-the-quintic) through a radically simplified abstract theory of groups acting on rings.
The applications are quite arcane, beginning with class field theory [V.28](/part-05/from-quadratic-reciprocity-to-vi38-augustus-de-morgan-18061871) and eventually growing into group cohomology and many other algebraic and topological methods used in arithmetic geometry [IV.5](/part-04/arithmetic-geometry). Exiled from Germany by the Nazis in 1933 , she died following surgery in the United States, at the height of her creative power. Further Reading Brewer, J., and M. Smith, eds. 1981 . Emmy Noether: A Tribute to Her Life and Work. New York: Marcel Dekker. Feynman, R. 1965 .
The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Colin Mc Larty $801VI$ . $77$ Wacław Sierpiński  b. Warsaw, 1882 ;  d. Warsaw, 1969 Number theory; set theory; real functions; topology Sierpiński studied mathematics at the Russian university in Warsaw under the guidance of Georgii Voronoi. In his first paper ( 1906 ), he improved gauss’s [VI.26](/part-06/carl-friedrich-gauss-17771855) estimate for the difference between the number of lattice points inside the circle $x^{2} + y^{2} \le N$ and the area of the circle, showing that it is $O(N^{1}/ {}^{3})$ .
He became an associate professor at the University of Lwów in 1910 , at which point his interest shifted to set theory, on which he wrote a textbook in 1912 , only the fifth book ever to be published on the subject. His first important results on set theory were obtained during World War I, which he spent in Russia: in $1915 - 16$ he constructed two curves that were among the first published examples of fractals, one known now as Sierpiński’s gasket and the other as Sierpiński’s carpet.
The latter is the set of all points (x , y) in the square [0 , 1 ]2 such that, when written out as base $3$ decimals, there is no position in which both $x$ and $y$ have $a_{1}$ . It is also known as Sierpiński’s universal curve, since it contains a homeomorphic image of every planar continuum (a continuum is a compact connected set) with out interior points. In 1917 , Souslin had shown that projections of borel sets [III.55](/part-03/measures) (from the plane into the line, say) need not be Borel.
Together with Lusin, Sierpiński proved in 1918 that in fact every analytic set (a projection of a Borel set) is the intersection of א 1 Borel sets (where א 1 is the smallest uncountable cardinal). That same year he also published an important study of the axiom of choice [III.1](/part-03/axiom-of-choice) and the role it plays in set theory and analysis, and proved that no continuum can be decomposed into countably many pairwise disjoint nonempty closed subsets.
In 1919 Sierpiński was made a full professor at the new Polish University of Warsaw and in 1920 he founded (together with Janiszewski and Mazurkiewicz) the first specialized mathematical journal, Fundamenta Mathematicae, which was devoted to set theory, topology, and applications. He remained its editor until

1951 . Among his results published in volume $1$ are $a$ proof that every countable subset of R n with out isolated points is homeomorphic to the rationals; a complete classification of countable compact subsets of R n , obtained jointly with Mazurkiewicz; and a necessary