# William Burnside (1852–1927)

VI.61.   Jules Henri Poincaré

Further Reading
Cooke, R. 1984. The Mathematics of Sonya Kovalevskaya.
 New York: Springer.
Koblitz, A. H. 1983. A Convergence of Lives. Sofia Kovalev-    until Philip Hall started his mathematical career in
 skaia: Scientist, Writer, Revolutionary. Boston, MA: Birk-   1928. Burnside’s influential book Theory of Groups
 häuser.
VI.60
b. London, 1852; d. West Wickham, England, 1927
Theory of groups; character theory; representation theory
Burnside’s mathematical abilities first showed them-
selves at school. From there he won a place at Cam-
bridge, where he read for the Mathematical Tripos and
graduated as 2 nd Wrangler in 1875. For ten years he
remained in Cambridge as a Fellow of Pembroke Col-
lege, coaching student rowers and mathematicians. In
1885, having published three very short papers, he was
appointed professor at the Royal Naval College, Green-
wich. He married in 1886 and the next year, at the
age of thirty-five, he embarked on his career as a pro-
ductive mathematician. He was elected as a Fellow of
the Royal Society in 1893 on the basis of his contri-
but i ons in applied mathematics (statistical mechanics
and hydrodynamics), geometry, and the theory of func-
tions. Although he continued to contribute to these
areas through out his working life, and added probabil-
ity theory to his fields of interest during World War I,
he turned to the theory of groups in 1893, and it is for
his discoveries in this subject that he is remembered.
   Burnside treated every aspect of the theory of finite
groups. He was much concerned with the search for
finite simple groups, and made the famous conjecture,
finally proved by Walter Feit and John Thompson in
1962, that there are no simple groups of odd compos-
ite order (see the classification of finite simple
groups [V.7](/part-05/the-classication-of-finite-simple-groups)). He helped to develop character theory,
which had been created by frobenius [VI.58](/part-06/ferdinand-georg-frobenius-18491917) in 1896,
into a tool for proving theorems of pure group theory,
using it in 1904 to spectacular effect when he proved
his so-called p α qβ -theorem: the theorem that groups
whose orders are divisible by at most two different
prime numbers are soluble. By asking, in effect, whether
a group all of whose elements have finite order and
which is generated by finitely many elements must be
finite, he launched the huge area of research which for
much of the twentieth century was known as the Burn-
side problem (see geometric and combinatorial
group theory [IV.10 §5.1](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory)).

785
Although cayley [VI.46](/part-06/arthur-cayley-18211895) and the Reverend T. P. Kirk-
man had written about groups before him, he was the
only British mathematician to work in group theory
of Finite Order (1897) was written in the hope of
“arousing interest among English mathematicians in a
branch of pure mathematics which becomes the more
William Burnside
his own country was minimal, however, until several
years after his death. It went to a second edition in
1911 (reprinted 1955), which differs from the first in
that it has been substantially revised and, in particu-
lar, it includes chapters about the character theory of
finite groups and its applications—mathematics which
had been much developed by Frobenius, Burnside, and
Schur over the fifteen years following the invention of
character theory in 1896.
Further Reading
Curtis, C. W. 1999. Pioneers of Representation Theory: Frobe-
nius, Burnside, Schur, and Brauer. Providence, RI: Ameri-
can Mathematical Society.
Neumann, P. M., A. J. S. Mann, and J. C. Tompson. 2004.
The Collected Papers of William Burnside, two volumes.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peter M. Neumann
VI.61       Jules Henri Poincaré
b. Nancy, France, 1854; d. Paris, 1912
Function theory; geometry; topology; celestial mechanics;
mathematical physics; foundations of science
Educated at the École Polytechnique and the École
des Mines in Paris, Poincaré began his teaching career
at the University of Caen in 1879. In 1881 he took
up an appointment at the University of Paris where,
from 1886, he held successive chairs until his death
in 1912. He was of a retiring nature and did not attract
graduate students, but his lecture courses provided the
basis for a number of treatises, mostly in mathematical
physics.
Poincaré came to international prominence in the
early 1880 s when, fusing ideas from complex func-
tion theory, group theory, non-Euclidean geometry, and
the theory of ordinary linear differential equations, he
identified an important class of automorphic functions.
Named Fuchsian functions, in honor of the mathemat i-
cian Lazarus Fuchs, they are defined on a disk and