# The Language and Grammar of Mathematics

[IV.16](/part-04/mirror-symmetry), tions [IV.13](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations), and general relativity and the einstein equa-operator algebras [IV.15](/part-04/operator-algebras) describe some fascinating examples of how mathematics and physics have enriched each other. I.2 The Language and Grammar of

Mathematics

1 Introduction

It is a remarkable phenomenon that children can learnto speak without ever being consciously aware of the sophisticated grammar they are using. Indeed, adults too can live a perfectly satisfactory life without ever thinking about ideas such as parts of speech, subjects, predicates, or subordinate clauses. Both children andadults can easily recognize ungrammatical sentences, at least if the mistake is not too subtle, and to do this it is not necessary to be able to explain the rules thathave been violated. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that one’s understanding of language is hugely enhanced bya knowledge of basic grammar, and this understanding is essential for anybody who wants to do more with language than use it unreflectingly as a means to an on linguistic end. a point, one can do and speak mathematics without knowing how to classify the different sorts of words The same is true of mathematical language. Up to one is using, but many of the sentences of advanced mathematics have a complicated structure that is much easier to understand if one knows a few basic termsof mathematical grammar. The object of this section is to explain the most important mathematical “parts of speech,” some of which are similar to those of nat-ural languages and others quite different. These are normally taught right at the beginning of a university course in mathematics. Much of The Companion can be understood without a precise knowledge of mathemat-ical grammar, but a careful reading of this article will help the reader who wishes to follow some of the later, more advanced parts of the book. that the statements of mathematics are supposed to The main reason for using mathematical grammar is be completely precise, and it is not possible to achieve complete precision unless the language one uses is free of many of the vaguenesses and ambiguities of ordinary speech. Mathematical sentences can also be highly complex: if the parts that made them up were not clear and simple, then the unclarities would rapidly accumulate and render the sentences unintelligible.

I. Introduction

needed in mathematical discourse, let us consider the To illustrate the sort of clarity and simplicity that is famous mathematical sentence “Two plus two equals four” as a sentence of English rather than of mathematics, and try to analyze it grammatically. On the face of it, it contains three nouns (“two,” “two,” and “four”), a verb (“equals”) and a conjunction (“plus”). However, looking more carefully we may begin to notice some oddities. For example, although the word “plus” resembles theword “and,” the most obvious example of a conjunction, it does not behave in quite the same way, as isshown by the sentence “Mary and Peter love Paris.” The verb in this sentence, “love,” is plural, whereas the verbin the previous sentence, “equals,” was singular. So the word “plus” seems to take two objects (which happento be numbers) and produce out of them a new, single object, while “and” conjoins “Mary” and “Peter” ina looser way, leaving them as distinct people. Reflecting on the word “and” a bit more, one finds that it has two very different uses. One, as above, is tolink two nouns, whereas the other is to join two whole sentences together, as in “Mary likes Paris and Peter likes New York.” If we want the basics of our language to be absolutely clear, then it will be important to beaware of this distinction. (When mathematicians are at their most formal, they simply outlaw the noun-linking use of “and”—a sentence such as “3 and 5 are prime numbers” is then paraphrased as “3 is a prime numberand 5 is a prime number.”) This is but one of many similar questions: anybody who has tried to classify all words into the standard eight parts of speech will know that the classification is hopelessly inadequate. What, for example, is the role ofthe word “six” in the sentence “This section has six subsections”? Unlike “two” and “four” earlier, it is certainly not a noun. Since it modifies the noun “subsection” it would traditionally be classified as an adjective, butit does not behave like most adjectives: the sentences “My car is not very fast” and “Look at that tall build-ing” are perfectly grammatical, whereas the sentences “My car is not very six” and “Look at that six building”are not just nonsense but ungrammatical nonsense. So do we classify adjectives further into numerical adjec-tives and nonnumerical adjectives? Perhaps we do, but then our troubles will be only just beginning. For exam-ple, what about possessive adjectives such as “my” and “your”? In general, the more one tries to refine the clas-sification of English words, the more one realizes how many different grammatical roles there are.

I.2. The Language and Grammar of Mathematics

2 Four Basic Concepts

Another word that famously has three quite distinct meanings is “is.” The three meanings are illustrated in the following three sentences. (1) 5 is the square root of 25.(2) 5 is less than 10. (3) 5 is a prime number. In the first of these sentences, “is” could be replacedby “equals”: it says that two objects, 5 and the square root of 25, are in fact one and the same object, just asit does in the English sentence “London is the capital of the United Kingdom.” In the second sentence, “is” playsa completely different role. The words “less than 10” form an adjectival phrase, specifying a property that numbers may or may not have, and “is” in this sentence is like “is” in the English sentence “Grass is green.” Asfor the third sentence, the word “is” there means “is an example of,” as it does in the English sentence “Mercuryis a planet.” sentences cease to resemble each other when they are These differences are reflected in the fact that the written in a more symbolic way. An obvious way to write(1) is 5= \sqrt{25}. \text{As for} (2), it would usually be written 5 third sentence would normally not be written symbol-$<$10, where the symbol “$<$” means “is less than.” The ically because the concept of a prime number is notquite basic enough to have universally recognized symbols associated with it. However, it is sometimes usefulto do so, and then one must invent a suitable symbol. One way to do it would be to adopt the convention thatifn is a positive integer, then P (n) stands for the sen- tence “the word “is,” is to use the language of sets.nis prime.” Another way, which does not hide

2.1 Sets

Broadly speaking, a set is a collection of objects, and in mathematical discourse these objects are mathematical ones such as numbers, points in space, or even other sets. If we wish to rewrite sentence (3) symbolically, another way to do it is to define P to be the collection, or set, of all prime numbers. Then we can rewrite itas “5 belongs to the set$P$.” This notion of belonging to a setand the symbol used is “is sufficiently basic to deserve its own symbol,$\in$.” So a fully symbolic way of writing the sentence is 5$\in P$. and the symbol “So the “is” of sentence (3) is more like “The members of a set are usually called its$\in$” is usually read “is an element of.”$\in$” than “elements$=$.”,

Although one cannot directly substitute the phrase “isan element of” for “is,” one can do so if one is prepared to modify the rest of the sentence a little. set. One is to list its elements inside curly brackets:\\{2 There are three common ways to denote a specific,3,5,7,11, 13, 17,19\\}, \text{for example}, \text{is the set whose elements are the eight numbers} 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, and 19. \text{The majority of sets considered by mathemati}-\text{cians are too large for this to be feasible}—indeed, \text{they are often infinite}—\text{so a second way to denote sets isto use dots to imply a list that is too long to write down}: \text{for example}, \text{the expressions and}\{2, 4, 6, 8, . . . \} \text{can be used to represent the set of}\{1, 2, 3, . . . , 100\} \text{all positive integers up to} 100 \text{and the set of all positive even numbers}, respectively. A \text{third way}, \text{and the way that is most important}, \text{is to define a set via aan example that shows how this is done is the expres} - property: sion${x}:$ x \text{is prime and} x < 20. To read an expres- sion such as this, one first reads the opening curly bracket as “The set of.” Next, one reads the symbol that occurs before the colon. The colon itself one readsas “such that.” Finally, one reads what comes after the colon, which is the property that determines the elements of the set. In this instance, we end up saying,“The set ofx such that x is prime and xis less than 20,” which is in fact equal to the set$\\{2}$, 3,5,7,11, 13,17, 19\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\} considered earlier.Many sentences of mathematics can be rewritten in set-theoretic terms. For example, sentence (2) earlier could be written as 5$\in {n}$:$n < 10$. Often there is no point in doing this (as here, where it is much eas-ier to write 5< 10) but there are circumstances where it becomes extremely convenient. For example, one of the great advances in mathematics was the use of Carte-sian coordinates to translate geometry into algebra and the way this was done was to define geometrical objects as sets of points, where points were themselves defined as pairs or triples of numbers. So, for exam-ple, the set$\\{(x}$, y)\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\}:$x^{2} + y^{2} = 1 is (\text{or represents})$ a circle of radius 1 with its center at the origin That is because, by the Pythagorean theorem, the dis-(0,0). \text{tance from}(0, 0) to (x, y) is x2 + y2, \text{so the sentence} “ x2 + y2 =1” can be reexpressed geometrically as “the distance fromabout was which points were in the circle, then we could(0, 0) to (x, y)is 1.” If all we ever cared make do with sentences such as “ x2 + y2 =1,” \text{but in geometry one often wants to consider the entire cir}-\text{cle as a single object} (\text{rather than as a multiplicity of points}, \text{or as a property that points might have}), \text{andthen set}-\text{theoretic language is indispensable}. \text{without sets is when one is defining new mathematical objects}. \text{Very often such an object is a set together with} A \text{second circumstance where it is usually hard to do aform of certain relationships among the elements of the mathematical structure imposed on it}, \text{which takes the set}. \text{For examples of this use of set}-\text{theoretic language}, \text{see sections} 1 and 2, \text{on number systems and algebraic structures}, respectively, \text{in mathematical definitions} [I.3](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions).some fundamental mathematics mathematical objects but about the process of math-Sets are also very useful if one is trying to do, that is, to prove statements not about met a ematical reasoning itself. For this it helps a lot if onecan devise a very simple language—with a small vocabulary and an uncomplicated grammar—into which itis in principle possible to translate all mathematical arguments. Sets allow one to reduce greatly the num-ber of parts of speech that one needs, turning almost all of them into nouns. For example, with the helpof the membership symbol “$\in$” one can do without adjectives, as the translation of “5 is a prime number”(where “prime” functions as an adjective) into “5$\in P$” has already suggested.1 This is of course an artificial process—imagine replacing “roses are red” by “rosesbelong to the set R”—but in this context it is not important for the formal language to be natural and easy to understand.

2.2 Functions

Let us now switch attention from the word “is” to someother parts of the sentences (1)–(3), focusing first on the phrase “the square root of” in sentence (1). If wewish to think about this phrase grammatically, then we should analyze what sort of role it plays in a sentence, and the analysis is simple: in virtually any mathematical sentence where the phrase appears, it is followed bythe name of a number. If the number isn, then this produces the slightly longer phrase, “the square rootof$n$,” which is a noun phrase that denotes a number and plays the same grammatical role as a number (atleast when the number is used as a noun rather than as an adjective). For instance, replacing “5” by “the square root of 25” in the sentence “5 is less than 7” yields a new sentence, “The square root of 25 is less than 7,”that is still grammatically correct (and true). One of the most basic activities of mathematics is to take a mathematical object and transform it into [IV.5 §3.1](/part-04/arithmetic-geometry).1. For another discussion of adjectives see arithmetic geometry

I. Introduction

another one, sometimes of the same kind and some-times not. “The square root of” transforms numbers into numbers, as do “four plus,” “two times,” “the cosine of,” and “the logarithm of.” A nonnumerical example is “the center of gravity of,” which transforms geometrical shapes (provided they are not too exotic or complicated to have a center of gravity) into points— meaning that if Sstands for a shape, then “the center of gravity ofspeaking, a mathematical transformation of this kind. S” \text{stands for a point}. A \text{function is}, \text{roughly ask}, “\text{What is a function}?” \text{is to suggest that the answer should be a It is not easy to make this definition more precise}. \text{Tothing of some sort}, \text{but functions seem to be more like processes}. Moreover, \text{when they appear in mathematical sentences they do not behave like nouns}. (\text{They are more like prepositions}, \text{though with a definite difference that will be discussed in the next subsection}.) \text{One might therefore think it in appropriate to ask what kind of object} “\text{the square root of}” is. \text{Should onenot simply be satisfied with the grammatical analysis already given}?\text{As it happens}, no. \text{Over and over again}, \text{through out mathematics}, \text{it is useful to think of a mathematical phenomenon}, \text{which may be complex and very un} - thinglike, \text{as a single object}. \text{We have already seen a simple example}: \text{a collection of infinitely many points in theplane or space is sometimes better thought of as a single geometrical shape}. \text{Why should one wish to do this for functions}? \text{Here are two reasons}. First, \text{it is conve}-\text{nient to be able to say something like}, “\text{The derivative of sin is cos},” \text{or to speak in general terms about some functions being} \text{differentiable} \text{and others not}. \text{More generally}, \text{functions can have properties}, \text{and in order to discuss those properties one needs to think of func}-\text{tions as things}. Second, \text{many algebraic structures are most naturally thought of as sets of functions}. (See, \text{for example}, \text{the discussion of groups and symmetry in} [I.3 §2.1](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions). \text{See also hilbert spaces} [III.37](/part - 03/bayesian - analysis), \text{function spaces Iff is a function}, \text{then the notation}[III.29](/part - 03/function - spaces), \text{and vector spaces}[I.3 §2.3](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions).) f (x) = y means that starts to speak formally about functions, it becomesf turns the object x into the object y. Once one important to specify exactly which objects are to be subjected to the transformation in question, and whatsort of objects they can be transformed into. One of the main reasons for this is that it makes it possible todiscuss another notion that is central to mathematics, that of inverting a function. (See [I.4 §1](/part-01/general-goals) for a discussion of why it is central.) Roughly speaking, the inverse of afunction is another function that undoes it, and that it

I.2. The Language and Grammar of Mathematics

undoes; for example, the function that takes a numbern to n - 4 is the inverse of the function that takes n ton + 4, since if you add four and then subtract four, or vice versa, you get the number you started with.Here is a functionf that cannot be inverted. It takes each number and replaces it by the nearest multipleof 100, rounding up if the number ends in 50. Thus, f (113) = 100, f (3879) = 3900, and f (1050) = 1100. It is clear that there is no way of undoing this process with a functiong. For example, in order to undo the effect ofto equal 113. But the same argument applies to everyf on the number 113 we would need g(100) number that is at least as big as 50 and smaller than 150, andonce.g(100) cannot be more than one number at ber. Can this be inverted? Yes it can, one might say: just divide the number by two again. And much of the Now let us consider the function that doubles a numtime this would be a perfectly sensible response, butnot, for example, if it was clear from the context that the numbers being talked about were positive integers.Then one might be focusing on the difference between even and odd numbers, and this difference could be encapsulated by saying that odd numbers are precisely those numbersn for which the equation 2 x = n does notbling process by halving. The problem here is that thehave a solution. (Notice that one can undo the dou relationship is not symmetrical: there is no function that can be undone by doubling, since you could neverget back to an odd number.) ful to specify two sets as well: thethe set of objects to be transformed, and the To specify a function, therefore, one must be care-domain, which isrange, which is the set of objects they are allowed to be trans-formed into. A functionf from a set A to a set B is a rule that specifies, for each elementy = f (x) of B. Not every element of the range needsx of A, an element to be used: consider once again the example of “two times” when the domain and range are both the set ofall positive integers. The set${f (x)}$:$x \in A \text{of values}$ actually taken by confusingly, the word “image” is also used in a differ-f is called the image of f . (Slightly ent sense, applied to the individualx \in  A, then its image is f (x).) elements of A: if sion A The following symbolic notation is used. The expres-and rangef: A \to  BB. If we then write means that f is a function with domainf (x) = y, we know thatxofmust be an element of B. Another way of writing A andf (x)y must be an element= y that is some- times more convenient is f: x \to  y . (The bar on the

arrow is to distinguish it from the arrow in f:$A \to B$, which has a very different meaning.)If we want to undo the effect of a function$f$:$A \to B$, then we can, as long as we avoid the problem that occurred with the approximating function discussed earlier. That is, we can do it if$f (x) and f (x^ ) \text{are dif}-$ ferent wheneverx and xare different elements of A. If this condition holds, thenthe other hand, if we want to find a functionf is called an injectiong that is. On undone byf , then we can do so as long as we avoid the problem of the integer-doubling function. That is, wecan do it if every elementy of B is equal to f (x) for some element ting$g(y) = x)$. If this condition holds, thenx of A (so that we have the option of set-f is called a then sur je ct io nf is called a. If f is both an injection and a surjection, bijection. Bijections are precisely the functions that have inverses. tidy definitions. Here, for example, is the specifica-tion of a function from the positive integers to the It is important to realize that not all functions have positive integers: f (n) = k if n is of the form 2 f (n) = nkiffor an integern is a prime number, k greater$than 1$, and$f$ (n) = 13 for all other positive integers n. This function has an unpleasant, arbitrary definition but it is nevertheless a perfectly legitimate function. Indeed, “most” functions, though not most functions that one actually uses, are so arbitrary that they cannot be defined. (Such functions may not be useful as individual objects, but they are needed so that the set of all functions from one set to another has an interesting mathematical structure.)

2.3 Relations

Let us now think about the grammar of the phrase “lessthan” in sentence (2). As with “the square root of,” it must always be followed by a mathematical object (inthis case a number again). Once we have done this we obtain a phrase such as “less thantantly different from “the square root of$n$,” which is impor-$n$” because it behaves like an adjective rather than a noun, and refers to a property rather than an object. This is just how prepositions behave in English: look, for example, at the word “under” in the sentence “The cat is under the table.” cians like to avoid too many parts of speech, as we have already seen for adjectives. So there is no symbol for At a slightly higher level of formality, mathemati“less than”: instead, it is combined with the previous word “is” to make the phrase “is less than,” which is

Figure 1 Similar shapes.

denoted by the symbol “<.” The grammatical rules for this symbol are once again simple. To use “tence, one should precede it by a noun and follow it$<$” in a senby a noun. For the resulting grammatically correct sentence to make sense, the nouns should refer to numbers(or perhaps to more general objects that can be put in order). A mathematical “object” that behaves like this is called ato call it a potential relationship. “Equals” and “is anrelation, though it might be more accurate element of” are two other examples of relations. As with functions, it is important, when specifying a relation, to be careful about which objects are to berelated. Usually a relation comes with a set A of objects that may or may not be related to each other. For example, the relation “positive integers, or alternatively on the set of all real$<$” might be defined on the set of all numbers; strictly speaking these are different relations. Sometimes relations are defined with reference to twosets A and B. For example, if the relation is “$\in$,” then A might be the set of all positive integers and B the set of all sets of positive integers. wishes to regard different objects as “essentially the There are many situations in mathematics where one same,” and to help us make this idea precise there isa very important class of relations known as equivalence relations. Here are two examples. First, in elementary geometry one sometimes cares about shapes butnot about sizes. Two shapes are said to be similar if one can be transformed into the other by a combination of reflections, rotations, translations, and enlarge-ments (see figure 1); the relation “is similar to” is an equivalence relation. Second, when doing arithmetic modulo between two whole numbers that differ by a multiplem [III.59](/part-03/modular-forms), one does not wish to distinguish$of$ m: in this case one says that the numbers are congruentto” is another equivalence relation.(mod m); the relation “is congruent (modm)

I. Introduction

common? The answer is that they both take a set (in What exactly is it that these two relations have in the first case the set of all geometrical shapes, and inthe second the set of all whole numbers) and split it into parts, called equivalence classes, where each part consists of objects that one wishes to regard as essentially the same. In the first example, a typical equivalence class is the set of all shapes that are similar to some given shape; in the second, it is the set of all integers that leave a given remainder when you divide bym (for example, ifis the set\\{. . . , m -=167 then one of the equivalence classes,-9, -2, 5, 12, 19, . . . \\}). tionis that it has the following three properties. First, it is An alternative definition of what it means for a rela-∼, defined on a set A, to be an equivalence relation reflexive, which means thatx ∼ x for every x in A. Sec- ond, it iselements ofsymmetric A and x, which means that if∼ y , then it must also be the casex and y are thatandzy are elements of∼ x. Third, it is transitive A such that, meaning that ifx ∼ y and y x∼, yz,, then it must be the case thatx ∼ z. (To get a feel for these properties, it may help if you satisfy yourself that the relations “is similar to” and “is congruent (modto” both have all three properties, while the relationm) “neither reflexive nor symmetric.)$<$,” defined on the positive integers, is transitive but One of the main uses of equivalence relations is to make precise the notion of struc tions. quotient [I.3 §3.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) con2.4 Binary Operations Let us return to one of our earlier examples, the sen-tence “Two plus two equals four.” We have analyzed the word “equals” as a relation, an expression that sits between the noun phrases “two plus two” and “four” and makes a sentence out of them. But what about“plus”? That also sits between two nouns. However, the result, “two plus two,” is not a sentence but a noun phrase. That pattern is characteristic of binary operations. Some familiar examples of binary operations are “plus,” “minus,” “times,” “divided by,” and “raised tothe power.” to be careful about the set to which a binary operation As with functions, it is customary, and convenient, is applied. From a more formal point of view, a binary operation on a set A is a function that takes pairs of elements of A and produces further elements of A from them. To be more formal still, it is a function with theset of all pairs(x, y) of elements of A as its domain

I.2. The Language and Grammar of Mathematics

and withnot reflected in the notation, however, since the symbol A as its range. This way of looking at it is for the operation comes between before them: we writex + y rather thanx and y+(x, y)rather than. have that are very useful if one wants to manipulate sentences in which it appears. Let us use the symbol There are four properties that a binary operation may* to denote an arbitrary binary operation on some set The operation* is said to be commutative if x* y Ais. always equal toalways equal toy((x*)*x, andy)* zas soci ative. For example, the opera-if x* (y* z) is tions “plus” and “times” are commutative and associa-tive, whereas “minus,” “divided by,” and “raised to the power” are neither (for instance, 9$(9 - 5)-3 = 1)$. These last two operations raise another- (5 - 3) = 7 while issue: unless the set A is chosen carefully, they may not always be defined. For example, if one restricts one’sat ten tion to the positive integers, then the expression 3- 5 has no meaning. There are two conventions one could imagine adopting in response to this. One might decide not to insist that a binary operation should be defined for every pair of elements ofit as a desirable extra property of an operation if it A, and to regard isforce is that binary operations defined every where. But the convention actually indo have to be defined every where, so that “minus,” though a perfectly good binary operation on the set of all integers, is not a binary operation on the set of all positive integers.An elemente of A is called an identity for* if e*x =x*e = x for every element x of A. The two most obvi- ous examples are 0 and 1, which are identities for “plus”and “times,” respectively. Finally, if$^{*} \text{has an identity} e$ andy such thatx belongs tox* Ay, then an= y* xinverse= e. For example, iffor x is an element* is “plus” then the inverse of$x$ is - x$, \text{while if}^{*}$ is “times” then the inverse is 1 These basic properties of binary operations are fun-$/x$. damental to the structures of abstract algebra. Seefour important algebraic structures [I.3 §2](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) for further details. 3 Some Elementary Logic

3.1 Logical Connectives

A conjunction. That is, it is a word (or symbol) that joins logical connective is the mathematical equivalent of a two sentences to produce a new one. We have already discussed an example, namely “and” in its sentencelinking meaning, which is sometimes written by thesymbol “∧,” particularly in more formal or abstract

mathematical discourse. If(note here the mathematical habit of representing not P and Q are statements just numbers but any objects whatsoever by single let-ters), then P ∧Q is the statement that is true if and only if both Another connective is the word “or,” a word that has P and Q are true. a more specific meaning for mathematicians than ithas for normal speakers of the English language. The mathematical use is illustrated by the tiresome joke of responding, “Yes please,” to a question such as, “Wouldyou like your coffee with or without sugar?” The symbol for “or,” if one wishes to use a symbol, is “the statement P ∨ Q is true if and only if P is true or∨,” and Q is true. This is taken to include the case when they are both true, so “or,” for mathematicians, is always theso-called inclusive version of the word. usually written “A third important connective is “implies,” which is⇒.” The statement P ⇒ Q means, roughly speaking, thatis sometimes read as “if QPis a consequence ofthen Q.” However, as with P , and “or,” this does not mean quite what it would in English.To get a feel for the difference, consider the following even more extreme example of mathematical pedantry.At the supper table, my young daughter once said, “Put your hand up if you are a girl.” One of my sons, to teaseher, put his hand up on the grounds that, since she had not added, “and keep it down if you are a boy,” his doingso was compatible with her command. cians to the word “implies,” or to sentences containing the word “if.” The statement Something like this attitude is taken by mathemati-P ⇒ Q is considered to be true under all circumstances except one: it is nottrue if P is true and Q is false. This is the definition of “implies.” It can be confusing because in English the word “implies” suggests some sort of connection between P and Q, that P in some way causes Q or is at least relevant to it. Ifcannot be true without QPbeing true, but all a mathe-causes Q then certainly P matician cares about is this logical consequence and not whether there is any reason for it. Thus, if youwant to prove that P ⇒ Q, all you have to do is rule out the possibility thatat the same time. To give an example: if P could be true andn is a posi-Q false tive integer, then the statement “n is a perfect square with final digit 7” implies the statement “number,” not because there is any connection betweenn is a prime the two but because no perfect square ends in a 7. Ofcourse, implications of this kind are less interesting mathematically than more genuine-seeming ones, butthe reward for accepting them is that, once again, one

avoids being confused by some of the ambiguities andsubtle nuances of ordinary language.

3.2 Quantifiers

Yet another ambiguity in the English language is ex-ploited by the following old joke that suggests that our priorities need to be radically rethought. (4) Nothing is better than lifelong happiness.(5) But a cheese sandwich is better than nothing. (6) Therefore, a cheese sandwich is better than life-long happiness. Let us try to be precise about how this play on words works (a good way to ruin any joke, but not a tragedy in this case). It hinges on the word “nothing,” which isused in two different ways. The first sentence means “There is no single thing that is better than lifelong happiness,” whereas the second means “It is better to have a cheese sandwich than to have nothing at all.” Inother words, in the second sentence, “nothing” stands for what one might call the null option, the option ofhaving nothing, whereas in the first it does not (to have nothing is not better than to have lifelong happiness). ing” are called they are highly prone to this kind of ambiguity. Math-Words like “all,” “some,” “any,” “every,” and “noth-quantifiers, and in the English language ematicians therefore make do with just two quanti-fiers, and the rules for their use are much stricter. They tend to come at the beginning of sentences, and can beread as “for all” (or “for every”) and “there exists” (or “for some”). A rewriting of sentence (4) that renders it unambiguous (but less like real English) is (4) For all x, lifelong happiness is at least as good asx. terms because the word “nothing” is not playing therole of a quantifier. (Its nearest mathematical equiva-The second sentence cannot be rewritten in these lent is something like theno elements.) empty set, that is, the set with clear about the difference between the beginnings ofthe following sentences.Armed with “for all” and “there exists,” we can be (7) Everybody likes at least one drink, namely water.(8) Everybody likes at least one drink; I myself go for red wine. The first sentence makes the point (not necessarily cor-rectly) that there is one drink that everybody likes,

I. Introduction

whereas the second claims merely that we all have something we like to drink, even if that something varies from person to person. The precise formulations that capture the difference are as follows. (7) There exists a drink D such that, for every person (8) For every person P , P likes D. P there exists a drink D such that P likes D. This illustrates an important general principle: if you take a sentence that begins “for everyy such that . . .” and interchange the two parts so thatx there exists it now begins “there existsy such that, for every x,. . .y is no longer allowed to depend on,” then you obtain a much stronger statement, sincex. If the second statement is still true—that is, if you really can chooseay that works for all the xat once—then the first statement is said to hold The symbols∀ and ∃are often used to stand for “for uniformly. all” and “there exists,” respectively. This allows us towrite quite complicated mathematical sentences in a highly symbolic form if we want to. For example, sup-pose we let P be the set of all primes, as we did earlier. Then the following symbols make the claim that there are infinitely many primes, or rather a slightly different claim that is equivalent to it. (9)∀n ∃m (m > n) ∧ (m \in P ). In words, this says that for everynwe can find some munpack sentence (9) further, we could replace the partthat is both bigger than n and a prime. If we wish tom \in  P by

(10)∀a, b ab = m ⇒ ((a = 1) ∨ (b = 1)).

There is one final important remark to make about the quantifiers “∀” and “∃.” I have presented them as if they were freestanding, but actually a quantifier is always associated with a set (one says that itthat set). For example, sentence (10) would not be aquantifies over translation of the sentence “allowed to be fractions: if a m = 3 andis prime” if$b =^{7}\text{athenandabb were} = 7$ without either that 7 is not a prime. Implicit in the opening symbolsa or b equaling 1, but this does not show3∀a, b is the idea that a and b are intended to be positive integers then we could have used the symbol. If this had not been clear from the context, N (which stands for the set of all positive integers) and started sentence (10)with∀a, b \in N instead.

I.2. The Language and Grammar of Mathematics

3.3 Negation

The basic idea of negation in mathematics is very sim-ple: there is a symbol, “¬,” which means “not,” and if P is any mathematical statement, then ¬P stands for the statement that is true if and only if P is not true. However, this is another example of a word that hasa slightly more restricted meaning to mathematicians than it has in ordinary speech. To illustrate this phenomenon once again, let us take Athe negation is of the sentence “Every number in the setto be a set of positive integers and ask ourselves what Asuggest, “Every number in the setis odd.” Many people when asked this question will Ais even.” However, this is wrong: if one thinks carefully about what exactly would have to happen for the first sentence to be false, one realizes that all that is needed is that at least one number inof the sentence is, “There exists a number in A should be even. So in fact the negation A that is even.” What explains the temptation to give the first, incorrect answer? One possibility emerges when one writesthe sentence more formally, thus: (11)$∀n \in A n \text{is odd}$. The first answer is obtained if one negates just the last part of this sentence, “is the negation of the whole sentence$n$is odd”; but what is asked for. That is, what is wanted is not (12)$∀n \in A ¬(n \text{is odd})$,$\text{but rather} (13)$¬(∀n \in  A n is odd), \text{which is equivalent to} (14)∃n \in  A n is even. A second possible explanation is that one is inclined(for ps yc ho linguistic reasons) to think of the phrase “every element ofgle, typical element of A” as denoting something like a sin-A. If that comes to have the feel of a particular number negation of “$n$is odd” is “nn, then we may feel that theis even.” The remedy is not to think of the phrase “every element ofit should always be part of the longer phrase, “$A$” on its own: for every element of$A$.”

3.4 Free and Bound Variables

Suppose we say something like, “At timethe projectile is$v$.” The letterst and v tstand for realthe speed of numbers, and they are called back of our mind is the idea that they are changing.variables, because in the More generally, a variable is any letter used to standfor a mathematical object, whether or not one thinks of that object as changing through time. Let us look onceagain at the formal sentence that said that a positive integer$\text{mis prime}: (10)$∀a$, b ab = m ⇒ ((a = 1) ∨ (b = 1))$. In this sentence, there are three variables, but there is a very important grammatical and semantica, b, and m, difference between the first two and the third. Here aretwo results of that difference. First, the sentence does not really make sense unless we already know whatis from the context, whereas it is important thata andmb doperfect sense to ask, “For which values ofnot have any prior meaning. Second, while it makesm is sen- tence (10) true?” it makes no sense at all to ask, “Forwhich values of$a$is sentence (10) true?” The letter$m$ in sentence (10) stands for a fixed number, not speci-fied in this sentence, while the lettersa and b, because of the initial∀a, b, do not stand for numbers—rather, in some way they search through all pairs of positive integers, trying to find a pair that multiply together to giveask, “What number is$m$. Another sign of the difference is that you can$m$?” but not, “What number is $a$is completely unaffected if one uses different letters for?” A fourth sign is that the meaning of sentence (10)

a and b, as in the reformulation

(10) ∀c$, d cd = m ⇒ ((c = 1) ∨ (d = 1))$.

One cannot, however, change li shing first thatn denotes the same integer asm to n without estab-m. A variable such ascalled a free variable. It sort of hovers there, free to takem, which denotes a specific object, is any value. A variable likenot denote a specific object, is called aa and b, of the kind that doesbound variable, or sometimes ais used mainly when the variable appears just after adummy variable. (The word “bound” quantifier, as in sentence (10).)Yet another indication that a variable is a dummy variable is when the sentence in which it occurs canbe rewritten without it. For instance, the expression 100 n=1 f (n) \text{is shorthand for} f (1)+f (2)+· · ·+ f (100), and the second way of writing it does not involve theletter$n$, so n was not really standing for anything in
