# Partial Differential Equations

IV.12. Partial Differential Equations

point, involve a combinatorial statement about certain types of geometric objects such as cubes, balls, or Many arguments in harmonic analysis will, at some boxes. For instance, one useful such statement is the Vitali covering lemma, which asserts that, given any collection will be a subcollection$B^{1}$, . . . , Bk of balls in Euclidean space B , . . . , B of balls that are dis-Rn, there joint, but that nevertheless contain a significant frac-tion of the volume covered by the original balls. To be$(i1)i m$ precise, one can choose the disjoint balls so that vol$j$.m = 1 (Bi)j ⩾ 5-n volj.=k 1 Bj.$(\text{The constant} 5$-n can be improved, but this will not concern us here.) This result is obtained by a “greedy algorithm”: one picks balls one by one, at each stage choosing the largest ball among the B that is disjointj

from all the balls already selected.One consequence of the Vitali covering lemma is the briefly describe. Given any function Hardy–Littlewood maximal inequalityf \in , which we will L1(Rn)$, anyx \in Rn$, and any r > 0, we can calculate the average$of$|f | in the n-dimensional sphere B(x, r ) of center x and radius F of f by lettingr. Next, we can define the F(x) be the largest of all these aver-maximal function ages asprecisely, one takes the supremum.) Then, for each pos-r ranges over all positive real numbers. (More itive real number\lambda one can define a set X\lambda to be the set of allimal inequality asserts that the volume of$x \text{such that} F(x) > λ$. The Hardy–Littlewood max-$X^{λ} \text{is at most}$ 5 n To prove it, one observes that(f L)1/λ.2 X can be covered by balls B(x, r ) on each of which the integral ofλ |f | is at leastthen apply the Vitali covering lemma, and the result\lambda vol(B(x, r )). To this collection of balls one can follows. The Hardy–Littlewood maximal inequality isa quantitative result, but it has as a qualitative consequence the asserts the following. If Lebesgue differentiation theoremf is any absolutely integrable, which function defined on Rn, then for almost every x \in  Rn the averages

f (y) dy vol(B(x, r ))B(x, r ) \text{ofasfr over the Euclidean balls about} \to 0. \text{This example demonstrates the impor} - x \text{tend to} f (x) \text{different from the one mentioned briefly in the previous section}, \text{butone can deduce that inequality from this one by the real interpolation}2. \text{This version of the Hardy}–\text{Littlewood inequality looks somewhat method discussed earlier}. 455 \text{tance of the underlying geometry} (\text{in this case}, \text{the combinatorics of metric balls}) \text{in harmonic analysis}. \text{Further Reading Stein}, E. M. 1970.\text{Properties of Functions Singular Integrals and} \text{differentiabili} ty. Princeton, NJ: \text{Princeton University Press}.. 1993. \text{Harmonic Analysis}. Princeton, NJ: \text{Princeton Wolff}, T. H. 2003.\text{University Press}.by I. Ł\text{aba and} C. Shubin. \text{University Lecture Series}, vol-\text{Lectures on Harmonic Analysis}, \text{edited ume} 29. Providence, RI: \text{American Mathematical Society}. IV.12 \text{Partial Differential Equations Sergiu Klainerman Introduction Partial differential equations} (\text{or PDEs}) \text{are an important class ofor systems of equations}, \text{in which the unknowns are functional equations}: \text{they are equations}, \text{functions of more than one variable}. \text{As a very crude analogy}, \text{PDEs are to functions as polynomial equations} (\text{such asx}2 + y2 = 1, \text{for example}) \text{are to num} - bers. The \text{distinguishing} \text{feature of PDEs}, \text{as opposed tomore general functional equations}, \text{is that they involve not only unknown functions}, \text{but also various derivatives of those functions}, \text{in algebraic combina}-\text{partial tion with each other and with other}, fixed, functions. \text{Other important kinds of functional equations aregral equations}, \text{which involve various integrals of the in te unknown functions}, and(ODEs), \text{in which the unknown functions depend onordinary differential equations only one independent variable} (\text{such as a time variable td}) \text{and the equation involves only ordinary derivatives}/dt, d2/dt2, d3/dt3, . . . \text{of these functions}. \text{hope to do is to give a very crude perspective on some Given the immense scope of the subject the best} I \text{can of the main issues and an even cruder idea of the mul}-\text{titude of current research directions}. \text{The difficulty one faces in trying to describe the subject of PDEs starts with its very definition}. \text{Is it a unified area of mathematics}, \text{devoted to the study of a clearly defined set of objects} (\text{in the way that algebraic geometry studies solutions of polynomial equations or topology studies manifolds}$, \text{for example})$, or is it rather a collection ofseparate fields, such as general relativity, several complex variables, or hydrodynamics, each one vast in its own right and centered on a particular, very difficult, equation or class of equations? I will attempt to argue
