# Braid Groups

$160$

probabilities $P[C = n]$ were. Typically, one does not know this, but one makes some kind of guess, called a prior distribution. For example, one might guess, before knowing that three coins had come up heads, that for each $n$ between $1$ and $10$ the probability that $n_{1}$

coins had been chosen wa$s^{10}$ . After this information, one would use the calculation above to revise one’s assessment and obtain a posterior distribution, in which the probability that $C = n$ would be proportional to

$1{}^{10}P$ [H 3 | C = n].

There is more to Bayesian analysis than simply applying Bayes’s theorem to replace prior distributions by posterior distributions. In particular, as in the example just given, there is not always an obvious prior distribution to take, and it is a subtle and interesting mathematical problem to devise methods for choosing prior distributions that are “optimal” in different ways. For further discussion, see mathematics and medical statistics [VII.11](/part-07/mathematics-and-medical-statistics) and mathematical statistics [VII.10](/part-07/mathematical-statistics). III . $4$ Braid Groups F. E. A. Johnson Take two parallel planes, each punctured at n points. Label the holes $1$ to n in each plane, and run a string from each hole in the first plane to one in the second, in such a way that no two strings go to the same hole. The result is an n-braid. Two different $3$ - braids , shown in two-dimensional projection in a similar manner to knot diagrams [III.44](/part-03/knot-polynomials), are given in figure $1$ . As the diagrams suggest, we insist that the strings go from left to right without “doubling back”; so, for example, a knotted string is not allowed. A certain freedom is allowed when we describe a braid: provided that the string ends remain fixed and the strings do not break or pass through each other, one can stretch, contract, bend, and otherwise move the strings about in three dimensions and end up with the “same” braid. This notion of “sameness” is an equivalence relation [I.2](/part-01/language-and-grammar) called braid isotopy. Braids may be composed as follows: arrange a pair of braids end to end to abut in a common (middle) plane, join up the strings, and remove the middle plane. For the braids X and Y in figure $1$ , the composition XY is given in figure $2$ . With this notion of composition, n-braids form a group $B^{n}$ . In our example, $Y = X - 1$ , since “pulling all the strings tight” shows that XY is isotopic to the trivial braid (figure $3$ ), which acts as the identity.

III. Mathematical Concepts

112233 X_{1}12233

Y

Figure $1$ Two $3$ - braids .

112233 Y X Figure2 Braid composition.

112233

Figure $3$ The trivial braid.

As a group, $B^{n}$ is generated by elements ( $σ^{i})^{1} \le i \le n - {}^{1}$ , where σ i is formed from the trivial braid by crossing the ith string over the $(i + 1)st$ as in figure $4$ . The reader may perceive a similarity between the σ i and the adjacent transpositions that generate the group S n of
