# Calabi–Yau Manifolds

III.6.   Calabi–Yau Manifolds                                                                                               163

                                                               and is represented in a coordinate basis by a Hermitian
III.6 Calabi–Yau Manifolds                                     matrix ga. ar{b} , which depends on position.1
         Eric Zaslow
                                                                   3    Holonomy, and Calabi–Yau Manifolds
                  1   Basic Definition                                       in Riemannian Geometry

Calabi–Yau manifolds, named after Eugenio Calabi and           On a riemannian manifold [I.3 §6.10](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) one can move a
Shing-Tung Yau, arise in Riemannian geometry and               vector along a path so as to keep it of constant length
algebraic geometry, and play a prominent role in string        and “always pointing in the same direction.” Curvature
theory and mirror symmetry.                                    expresses the fact that the vector you wind up with at
   In order to explain what they are, we need first             the end of the path depends on the path itself. When
to recall the notion of orientability on a real mani-          your path is a closed loop, the vector at the starting
fold [I.3 §6.9](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). Such a manifold is orientable if you          point comes back to a new vector at the same point.
can choose coordinate systems at each point in such            (A good example to think about is a path on a sphere
a way that any two systems x = (x 1 , . . . , x m ) and        that goes from the North Pole to the equator, then a
y = (y 1 , . . . , y m ) that are defined on overlapping sets   quarter of the way around the equator, then back to
give rise to a positive Jacobi an: det(∂y i /∂x j ) > 0. The    the North Pole again. When the journey is completed,
notion of a Calabi–Yau manifold is the natural com-            the “constant” vector that began by pointing south will
plex analogue of this. Now the manifold is complex,            have been rotated by 90◦ .) With each loop we asso-
and for each local coordinate system z = (z1 , . . . , zn )    ciate a matrix operator called the holonomy matrix,
one has a holomorphic function [I.3 §5.6](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) f (z). It is         which sends the starting vector to the ending vector;
vital that f should be nonvanishing: that is, it never         the group generated by all of these matrices is called
takes the value 0. There is also a compatibility condi-        the holonomy group of the manifold. Since the length
tion: if . ar{z}(z) is another coordinate system, then the cor-     of the vector does not change during the process of
responding function f ̃ is related to f by the equation         keeping it constant along the loop, the holonomy matri-
f = f ̃ det(∂ z̃a /∂zb ). Note that if we replace all complex   ces all lie in the orthogonal group of length-preserving
terms by real terms in this definition, then we have the        matrices, O(m). If the manifold is oriented, then the
notion of a real orientation. So a Calabi–Yau manifold         holonomy group must lie in SO(m), as one can see
can be thought of informally as a complex manifold             by transporting an oriented basis of vectors around
with complex orientation.                                      the loop.
                                                                 Every complex manifold of (complex) dimension n
2    Complex Manifolds and Hermitian Structure                 is also a real manifold of (real) dimension m = 2 n,
                                                               which one can think of as coordinatized by the real
Before we go any further, a few words about complex            and imaginary parts of the complex coordinates zj .
and Kähler geometry are in order. A complex manifold           Real manifolds that arise in this way have additional
is a structure that looks locally like Cn , in the sense       structure. For example, the fact that we can multiply
                                                                                                            √
that one can find complex coordinates z = (z1 , . . . , zn )    complex coordinate directions by i =           −1 implies
near every point. More over, where two coordinate sys-          that there must be an operator on the real tangent
tems z and z̃ overlap, the coordinates z̃ a are holomor-       space that squares to −1. This operator has eigenvalues
phic when they are regarded as functions of the z b .          ±i, which can be thought of as “holomorphic” and
Thus, the notion of a holomorphic function on a com-           “anti-holomorphic” directions. The Hermitian property
plex manifold makes sense and does not depend on the           states that these directions are orthogonal, and we say
coordinates used to express the function. In this way,         that the manifold is Kähler if they remain so after
the local geometry of a complex manifold does indeed           transport around loops. This means that the holon-
look like an open set in Cn , and the tangent space at a       omy group is a subgroup of U(n) (which itself is a
point looks like Cn itself.                                    subgroup of SO(m): complex manifolds always have
   On complex vector spaces it is natural to consider          real orientations). There is a nice local character ization
Hermitian inner products [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis) represented by her-          of the Kähler property: if ga. ar{b} are the components of
mitian matrices [III.50 §3](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties) ga. ar{b} with respect to a basis
ea . On complex manifolds, a Hermitian inner product            1. The notation ga. ar{b} indicates the conjugate-linear property of a
on the tangent spaces is called a “Hermitian metric,”          Hermitian inner product.

164                                                                                    III. Mathematical Concepts

the Hermitian metric in some coordinate patch, then        its unique SU(n)-holonomy metric has vanishing Ricci
there exists a function φ on that patch such that ga. ar{b} =   tensor, and is therefore of interest in general relativity.
∂ 2 φ/∂za ∂ . ar{z}b .                                             A fundamental problem in theoretical physics is the
   Given a complex orientation—that is, the nonmetric      incorporation of Einstein’s theory into the quantum
definition of a Calabi–Yau manifold given above—a           theory of particles. This enterprise is known as quan-
compatible Kähler structure leads to a holonomy that       tum gravity, and Calabi–Yau manifolds figure promi-
lies in SU(n) ⊂ U(n), the natural analogue of the case     nently in the leading theory of quantum gravity, string
of real orientation. This is the metric definition of a     theory [IV.17 §2](/part-04/vertex-operator-algebras).
Calabi–Yau manifold.                                          In string theory, the fundamental objects are one-
                                                           dimensional “strings.” The motion of the strings in
             4   The Calabi Conjecture                     space-time is described by two-dimensional trajecto-
                                                           ries, known as worldsheets, so every point on the world-
Calabi conjectured that, for any Kähler manifold of        sheet is labeled by the point in space-time where it sits.
complex dimension n and any complex orientation,           In this way, string theory is constructed from a quan-
there exists a function u and a new Kähler metric g̃,      tum field theory of maps from two-dimensional rie-
given in coordinates by                                    mann surfaces [III.79](/part-03/riemann-surfaces) to a space-time manifold M.
                                   ∂2 u                     The two-dimensional surface should be given a Rie-
                 g̃a. ar{b} = ga. ar{b} +              ,             mannian metric, and there is an infinite-dimensional
                                  ∂za ∂ . ar{z} b
                                                           space of such metrics to consider. This means that
that is compatible with the orientation. In equations,
                                                           we must solve quantum gravity in two dimensions—
the compatibility condition states that
                                                           a problem that, like its four-dimensional cousin, is too
                           ∂2 u                             hard. If, however, it happens that the two-dimensional
             det ga. ar{b} +                 = |f |2 ,
                          ∂z a ∂ . ar{z}b                       worldsheet theory is conformal (invariant under local
where f is the holomorphic orientation function dis-       changes of scale), then just a finite-dimensional space
cussed above. Thus, the metric notion of a Calabi–Yau      of conformally inequivalent metrics remains, and the
manifold amounts to a formidable nonlinear partial dif-    theory is well-defined.
ferential equation for u. Calabi proved the uniqueness        The Calabi–Yau condition arises from these consid-
and Yau proved the existence of a solution to this equa-   erations. The requirement that the two-dimensional
tion. So in fact the metric definition of a Calabi–Yau      theory should be conformal, so that the string theory
manifold is uniquely determined by its Kähler structure    makes good sense, is in essence the requirement that
and its complex orientation.                               the Ricci tensor of space-time should vanish. Thus, a
   Yau’s theorem establishes that the space of metrics     two-dimensional condition leads to a space-time equa-
with holonomy group SU(n) on a manifold with com-          tion, which turns out to be exactly Einstein’s equation
plex orientation is in correspondence with the space       with out matter. We add to this condition the “phe-
of inequivalent Kähler structures. The latter space        nomenological” criterion that the theory be endowed
can easily be probed with the techniques of algebraic      with “supersymmetry,” which requires the space-time
geometry.                                                  manifold M to be complex. The two conditions together
                                                           mean that M is a complex manifold with holonomy
       5   Calabi–Yau Manifolds in Physics                 group SU(n): that is, a Calabi–Yau manifold. By Yau’s
                                                           theorem, the choices of such M can easily be described
Einstein’s theory of gravity, general relativity, con-     by algebraic geometric methods.
struc ts equations that the metric of a Riemannian             We remark that there is a kind of distillation of string
space-time manifold must obey (see general rela-           theory called “topological strings,” which can be given
tivity and the einstein equations [IV.13](/part-04/general-relativity-and-the-einstein-equations)). The            a rigorous mathematical framework. Calabi–Yau mani-
equations involve three symmetric tensors: the metric,     folds are both symplectic and complex, and this leads
the ricci curvature [III.78](/part-03/ricci-flow) tensor, and the energy–       to two versions of topological strings, called A and B,
momentum tensor of matter. A Riemannian manifold           that one can associate with a Calabi–Yau manifold. Mir-
whose Ricci tensor vanishes is a solution to these equa-   ror symmetry is the remarkable phenomenon that the
tions when there is no matter, and is a special case       A version of one Calabi–Yau manifold is related to the
of an Einstein manifold. A Calabi–Yau manifold with        B version of an entirely different “mirror partner.” The