# Computational Complexity Classes

III . $10$ .

Computational Complexity Classes

line by adding one point at each end: we call the added points $+ \infty$ and $- \infty$ . The resulting object, known as the extended real line [− . nfty , + . nfty ] , can be given a topology in a natural way, which basically defines what it means to converge to $+ \infty$ or to $- \infty$ . The extended real line is compact: any sequence x n of extended real numbers will have a subsequence that either converges to $+ \infty$ , or converges to $- \infty$ , or converges to a finite number.
Thus, by using this compactification of the real line, we can generalize the notion of a limit to one that no longer has to be a real number. While there are some drawbacks to dealing with extended reals instead of ordinary reals (for instance, one can always add two real numbers together, but the sum of $+ \infty$ and $- \infty$ is undefined), the ability to take limits of what would otherwise be divergent sequences can be very useful, particularly in the theory of infinite series and improper integrals. It turns out that a single noncompact space can have many different compactificatio ns.
For instance, by the device of stereographic projection, one can topologically identify the real line with a circle that has a single point removed. (For example, if one maps the real number x to the point $(x/(1 + x^{2})$ , $x^{2}/(1 + x^{2})$ ), then $11$ R maps to the circle of radiu$s^{2}$ and center (0 , ${}^{2})$ , with the north pole ( $0$ , $1$ ) removed .) If we then insert the missing point, we obtain the one-point compactification R ∪ ${\infty}$ of the real line. More generally, any reasonable topological space (e . g .
, a locally compact Hausdorff space) has a number of compactificatio ns, ranging from the one-point compactification X $∪{\infty}$, which is the “minimal” compactification as it adds only one point, to the Stone-Čech compactification βX, which is the “maximal” compactification and adds an enormous number of points. The Stone-Čech compactification β N of the natural numbers N is the space of ultrafilters, which are very useful tools in the more infinitary parts of mathematics. One can use compactificatio ns to distinguish between different types of divergence in a space.
For instance, the extended real line [− . nfty , + . nfty ] distinguishes between divergence to $+ \infty$ and divergence to $- \infty$ . In a similar spirit, by using compactificatio ns of the plane $R^{2}$ such as the projective plane [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), one can distinguish a sequence that diverges along (or near) the x-axis from a sequence that diverges along (or near) the y-axis. Such compactificatio ns arise naturally in situations in which sequences that diverge in different ways exhibit markedly different behavior.
$169$ Another use of compactificatio ns is to allow one to view one type of mathematical object rigorously as a limit of others. For instance, one can view a straight line in the plane as the limit of increasingly large circles by describing a suitable compactification of the space of circles that includes lines. This perspective allows us to deduce certain theorems about lines from analogous theorems about circles, and conversely to deduce certain theorems about very large circles from theorems about lines.
In a rather different area of mathematics, the Dirac delta function is not, strictly speaking, a function, but it exists in certain (local) compactificatio ns of spaces of functions, such as spaces of measures [III.55](/part-03/measures) or distributions [III.18](/part-03/distributions). Thus, one can view the Dirac delta function as a limit of classical functions, and this can be very useful for manipulating it. One can also use compactificatio ns to view the continuous as the limit of the discrete: for instance, it is possible to compactify the sequence $Z/2Z$ , $Z/3Z$ , $Z/4Z$ , . . .
of cyclic groups in such a way that their limit is the circle group $T = R/Z$ . These simple examples can be generalized to much more sophisticated examples of compactificatio ns, which have many applications in geometry, analysis, and algebra. III . $10$ Computational Complexity Classes One of the basic challenges of theoretical computer science is to determine what computational resources are necessary in order to perform a given computational task.
The most basic resource is time, or equivalently (given the hardware) the number of steps needed to implement the most efficient algorithm that will carry out the task. Especially important is how this time scales up with the size of the input for the task: for instance, how much longer does it take to factorize an integer with $2n$ digits than an integer with n digits? Another resource connected with the feasibility of a computation is memory: one can ask how much storage space a computer will need in order to implement an algorithm, and how this can be minimized.
A complexity class is a set of computational problems that can be performed with certain restrictions on the resources allowed. For instance, the complexity class P consists of all problems that can be performed in “polynomial time”: that is, there is some positive integer k such that if the size of the problem is n (in the example above, the size was the number of digits of the integer to be factorized), then the computation can be carried out in at