# Differential Forms and Integration

III.16. Differential Forms and Integration

. et . et (AB)A, αβ=multiplies them by det. et  A . et  B. (The determinant of a product A. et  B. It follows that equals the product of the determinants.) other matrix, thenby the multiplicative property just discussed. It follows(iii) If A is a matrix with determinant 0 and AB will have determinant 0 as well, B is any that Therefore a matrix with determinant 0 is not invert-$\text{AB cannot equal} I^{n}$, since In has determinant 1. ible. The converse of this turns out to be true as well: a matrix with nonzero determinant is invertible.
Thus, the determinant gives us a way of finding out whether a matrix can be inverted. III.16 Differential Forms and

Integration

Terence Tao

It goes with out saying that integration is one of the fundamental concepts of single-variable calculus. How-ever, there are in fact three concepts of integration that appear in the subject: the known as the antiderivative indefinite integral), the unsigned definite inte-f (also gral[a, b] f (x) dx(which one would use to find the area under a curve, or the mass of a one-dimensional object of varying density), and the signed definite integral compute the work required to move a particle fromab f (x) dx (which one would use, for instance, toa tob functions).
For simplicity we shall restrict our attention here tof: R\to  R that are continuous on the entire real line (and similarly, when we come to differential forms, we shall discuss only forms that are continuous on the entire domain). We shall also informally use terminology such as “infinitesimal” in order to avoid having to discuss the (routine) “epsilon–delta” analytical issues that one must resolve in order to make these integration concepts fully rigorous. closely related to each other in single-variable calcu - lus;
indeed, These three concepts of integration are of course the fundamental theorem of calculus [I.3 §5.5](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions) relates the signed definite integralto any one of the indefinite integrals F = a bff (x)by thedx formula$bf (x) dx = F(b) - F(a)$, (1)

while the signed and unsigned integrals are related bythe simple identity ab f (x) dx = −a f (x) dx = f (x) dx, (2) which is valid wheneverab a ⩽ b.[a, b] 175 several-variable calculus, though, these three concepts begin to diverge significantly from each other. The When one moves from single-variable calculus to indefinite integral generalizes to the notion of ato a differential equation, or to an integral of a connec-solution tion, unsigned definite integral generalizes to the vector field [IV.6 §5](/part - 04/algebraic - topology), or bundle [IV.6 §5](/part - 04/algebraic - topology).
The lebesgue integral measure space[III.55](/part - 03/measures), or more generally to. Finally, the signed definite integral gen-integration on a eralizes to the focus here. While these three concepts are still related integration of forms, which will be our to each other, they are not as interchangeable as they are in the single-variable setting.
The integration - of-forms concept is of fundamental importance in differential topology, geometry, and physics, and also yields one of the most important examples of cohomology [IV.6 §4](/part - 04/algebraic - topology), namely speaking) measures the extent to which the fund a men-de Rham cohomology, which (roughly tal theorem of calculus fails in higher dimensions andon general manifolds.
informally revisit one of the basic applications of the signed definite integral from physics, namely com-To provide some motivation for the concept, let us puting the amount of work required to move a one dimensional particle from point presence of an external field.
(For example, one mighta to point b in the be moving a charged particle in an electric field.) Atthe infinitesimal level, the amount of work required to move a particle from a pointx \in  R to a nearby point ix place men(ti)+1 \in  R is (up to a small error) proportional to the dis-Δx = x - x , with the constant of pro- portion al it yf ((xi)i) depending on the initial locatio(ni()+1)i xi of the particle. Thus, the total work required for this is approximate lyf (x )Δx .
Note that we do not requirexthe infinitesimal worki+1 to be to the right ofi f (xixi, so the displacement)Δx ) may well be negative.Δxi (or To return to the non infinitesimal problem of comput-$ii$ ing the work required to move fromtrarily select a discrete pathx = a, xa, xto, . . . , xb, we arbi-= b froma to b, and approximate the work a(s0)1 2 nb f (x) dx . pprox n-1 f (xi)Δxi. (3)ai = 0

Again, we do not require(xi)+1 to be to the right of xi; it is quite possible for the path to “backtrack” repeat-edly: for instance, one might havex < x+ > x+ for some backtracking eventually cancels itself out; regard less$i$. However, it turns out that the effect of such(ii()1()i)2 of what path we choose, the expression (3) above con-verges as the maximum step size tends to zero, and the

176

limit is the signed definite integral

bf (x) dx, (4)

provided only that the total length path (which controls the amount of backtracking in-(an)i=-0 1 |Δxi| of the volved) stays bounded. In particular, in the case whena = b, so that all paths are closed (i.e., x = x ), we see 0 n that the signed definite integral is zero: af (x) dx = 0. (5)

integral it is obvious that we have the concatenation formula From this in formal definition of the signed definite ac f (x) dx = b f (x) dx + c f (x) dx (6)regard less of the relative position of the real numbers a, b, andac. In particular (setting a a =b c and using (5)) we conclude that ba Thus, if we reverse a path froma path fromab f (x)to ad, then the sign of the integralx = −b f (x)adx.to b to form changes. This contrasts with thegralf (x) dx, since the set unsigned definite inte-[a, b] of numbers between bers between[a, b]a andbbandis exactly the same as the set of num-a.
Thus we see that paths are not quite the same as sets: they carry ancan be reversed, where as sets do not.orientation which to higher-dimensional integration: that is, from single-variable calculus to several-variable calculus. It turns Now let us move from one-dimensional integration out that there are increase: the “ambient space,”two objects whose dimensions may1 which will now be R ninstead of R, and the path, which will now become an oriented gr at i on will take place.
For example, ifk-dimensional manifold S, over which the inte-n = 3 and k = 2, then one is integrating over a surface that lives in R3. Let us begin with the case n ⩾ 1 and k = 1. Here, we will be integrating over a continuously differentiable path (or oriented rectifiable curve)$γ in R^{n} \text{starting and}$ ending at points may or may not be distinct, depending on whether thea and b, respectively.
(These points path is open or closed.) From a physical point of view, we are still computing the work required to move froma to b, but now we are moving in several dimensions plicity, although the true power of the integration-of-forms concept ismuch more apparent when we integrate on more general spaces, such1. We will start with integration on Euclidean spaces Rn for sim- as abstractn-dimensional manifolds.

III. Mathematical Concepts

instead of one. In the one-dimensional case, we did not need to specify exactly which path we used to get from a However, in higher dimensions, the exact choice of theto b, because all backtracking canceled itself out. pathγ becomes important. parametrizedγ Formally, a path from from the unit interval) as a continuously differentiable function[a0,1 to] bto can be described (or Rn such that γ(0) =a and γ(1) = b. For instance, the line segment froma to b can be parametrized as γ(t) = (1 - t)a + tb. This segment also has many other par a me tr iz at i ons, such as  ̃γ(t) = (1 - t2)a + t2 b;
however, as in the one dimensional case, the exact choice of parametrization does not ultimately influence the integral. On the other hand, the reverse line segment$(-γ)(t) = ta + (1 - t)b$ fromalongb-γtowill turn out to be the negative of the integralais a genuinely different path; the integral alongγ. approximate the continuous path As in the one-dimensional case, we will need to$γ \text{by a discrete pathx}^{0} = γ(t^{0})$, x1 = γ(t1)$, x2 = γ(t2)$, $. . . , xn = γ(tn)$, whereγ(t0) = a and γ(tn) = b. Again, we allow some backtracking:
displacementtΔi +x1 is not necessarily larger than= x - x \in  Rn from x to xti. Theis now aon the generalization to manifolds, one should think vector rather than a scalar. (Indeed, with an eye(ii()+1()i()i()i)+1 ofΔxas an infinitesimal tangent vector to the ambii ent space Rn at the point x .) In the one-dimensional i

case, we converted the scalar displacementΔx intoi

a new number$f (x^{i})\Delta x^{i}$, which was linearly related to the original displacement by a proportionality con-stantf (x ) that depended on the position x . In higher dimensions, we again have a linear dependence, but$i^{i}$ this time, since the displacement is a vector, we must replace the simple constant of proportionality by a linear transformation represents the infinitesimal “work” required to move(ωx)i from Rn to R. Thus, ωx i(Δxi) fromxi to (xi)+1. In technical terms, ωx is a linear func-i

tional on the space of tangent vectors atx , and is thusi

a cotangent vector at$x$. By analogy with (3), the neti

workγ is approximated byγ ω required to move from a to b along the pathγ ω . pprox n i=-0 1 ωx i(Δxi). (7) As in the one-dimensional case, one can show that the right-hand side of (7) converges if the maximum step size sup zero and the total length0⩽i⩽n - 1 |. elta xi|nof the path converges to - 1 |. elta xi| of the path staysi = 0 III.16. Differential Forms and Integration bounded. The limit is written asare restricting our attention to continuous functions.γ ω.
(Recall that we The existence of this limit uses the continuity of The objectω, which continuously assigns2 a cotan-ω.) gent vector to each point in Rn, is called a 1 - form, and (7) leads to a recipe for integrating any 1-formon a pathγ. That is, to shift the emphasis slightly, itω allows us to integrate the pathω. Indeed, it is useful to think of this integration asγ“against” the 1-form a product) that takes the curve binary operation (similar in some ways to the dotγ and the form ω as inputs, and returns a scalar in fact a “duality” between curves and forms; compare,γ ω as output.
There is for instance, the identity which expresses (part of) the fundamental fact that integration of forms is a linear operation, with theγ(ω1 + ω2) =γ ω1 +γ ω2, identity which generalizes (6) whenever the initial point ofthe final point ofγ1γ+ γ, where2 ω =γγ1 ω+ +γ is theγ2 ω, concatenationγ2 is 1 1 2 of Recall that ifγ1 and γ2.3 fis a differentiable function from Rn tofrom R, then its derivative at a point Rn to R(see [I.3 §5.3](/part - 01/fundamental - definitions)).
If fis continuously differ-x is a linear map entiable, then this linear map depends continuously onx, and can therefore be thought of as a 1-form, which we denote by d This 1-form can be characterized as the unique 1-formf , writing dfx for the derivative at x. such that one has the approximation

$f (x + v) \approx f (v) + df^{x} (v)$

for all infinitesimal is that|f (x + v) - f (v)v . (More rigorously, the condition- df (v)|/|v| → 0 as v \to  0.) alizes to The fundamental theorem of calculus (1) now gener-$x$ d$f = f (b) - f (a) (8)$ whenever pointb. In particular, ifγ is any oriented curve from a pointγ γ is closed, then df = 0. Notea to a that in order to interpret the left-hand side of the above equation, we are regarding it as a particular example ofγ bundle2. More precisely, one can think of3.
This duality is best understood using the abstract, and much.ω as a section of the cotangent more general, formalism of homology and cohomology. In particular, one can remove the requirement thatγ2 begins where γ1 leaves off by generalizing the notion of an integral to cover not just integration on paths, but also integration on formal sums or differences of paths. This makes the duality between curves and forms more symmetric.

177

an integral of the formbe the form df . Note also that, with this interpretation,γ ω: in this case,ω happens to dit does not appear under an integral sign.f has an independent meaning (it is a 1-form) even if small1-form that can be written as d A 1-form whose integral against every sufficiently4 closed curve vanishes is call edf for some continuously closed, while a differentiable function is called mental theorem implies that every exact form is closed.exact. Thus, the funda This turns out to be a general fact, valid for all mani-folds. Is the converse true:
that is, is every closed form exact? If the domain is a Euclidean space, or indeed any other simply connected manifold, then the answer is yes (this is a special case of theit is not true for general domains. In modern terminol-Poincaré lemma), but ogy, this demonstrates that the de Rham cohomology of such domains can be nontrivial. an object which we denote by As we have just seen, a 1-form can be thought of asω that associates with each pathω. Of course, ω is not justγ a scalar, any old function from paths to scalars:
it must sat-isfy the concatenation and reversing rules discussedγ earlier, and this, together with our continuity assump - tions, more or less forces it to be associated with some kind of continuously varying linear function that can beused, in combination withγ, to define an integral. Now let us see if we can generalize this basic idea from paths to stick to the two-dimensional case, that is, to int eg ratio nk-dimensional sets with k > 1.
For simplicity we shall of forms on (oriented) surfaces in Rn, since this already illustrates many features of the general case. Physically, such integrals arise when one is computing a across a surface. We parametrized one-dimensional ori-flux of some field (e.g., a magnetic field) ented curves as continuously differentiable functionsγ from the interval [0, 1] to Rn. It is thus natural to parametrize two-dimensional oriented surfaces as con - tinuous ly differentiable functionsφdefined on the unit square[0, 1]2.
This does not in fact cover all possible surfaces one wishes to integrate over, but it turns out that one can cut up more general surfaces into pieces that can be parametrized using “nice” domains suchas[0,1]2. inter valt In the one-dimensional case, we cut up the orientedto t [0=, 1]tinto infinitesimal oriented intervals from+ . elta t, which led to infinitesimal curves fromi xi + i 1= γ((ti)i) to xi + 1 = γ(ti + 1) = xi + . elta xi. Note that tract i ble point.4.
The precise condition needed is that the curve should be, which means that it can be continuously shrunk down to acon - 178 . eltaγx^ (ti and). elta t . In the two-dimensional case, we will cut up. elta t are related by the approximation . elta xi . pprox the unit square obvious way.(ii)5 A typical one of these will have cor-[0,1]2 into infinitesimal squares in an ners of the form(t + . elta t, t + . elta t).
The surface described by(t1$, t2)$, (t1 + Δt$, t2)$, (t1$, t2 +φ \delta\text{cant})$, then be partitioned into regions, with corners$φ(t^{1} +\Delta t$, t2 ), φ(t $, t +\Delta t)$, φ(t +Δt$, t +\Delta t)φ(t, \text{each of}1$, t2), which carries an orientation.
Since it is approximately linear at small distance scales, so1 2 1 2 1φis differentiable,2 this region is approximately an oriented parallelogram in Rn with corners x, x + . elta x, x + . elta x, x + . elta x +. elta2 x, where x = φ(t1, t2) and1 . elta1 x and2 . elta2 x are the1 infinitesimal vectors$\partialφ \partialφ\Delta1 x = \partial t1 (t1$, t2). elta t, . elta2 x = . artial t2 (t1, t2). elta t. Let us refer to this object as the infinitesimal parallel-ogram with dimensions. elta x ∧ . elta x and base point x.
For now, we will think of the symbol “notational convenience and not try to interpret it. In1 2∧” as a mere order to integrate in a manner analogous with integration on curves, we now need some sort of func-tionalωx at this base point that depends continuously onmal parallelogram and return an infinitesimal number x. This functional should take the above infinitesiωof “flux” passing through this parallelogram.$x (\Delta^{1}x ∧ \Delta^{2}x)$, which one can think of as the amount certain properties.
For instance, if you double double one of the sides of the infinitesimal parallel-As in the one-dimensional case, we expectω. elt(ax)1 to havex, you ogram, so (by the continuity of through the parallelogram should double. More gener-ω) the “flux” passing ally,. elta x ωandx (. elta \1 elta1 xx∧: in other words, it isΔ2 x) should depend linearly on each ofbilinear. (This gen- eralizes the linear dependence in the one-dimensional case.)1 2 Another important property is that $ω^{x} (\Delta^{2}x ∧ \Delta^{1}x) = −ω^{x}(\Delta^{1}x ∧ \Delta^{2}x)$.
(9) That is, the bilinear form this has an intuitive explanation: the parallelogram rep-ωx is antisymmetric. Again, resented bybyΔ x ∧ ΔΔx2 xexcept that it has had its orientation∧Δ1 x is the same as that represented reversed, so the “flux” now counts negatively where itused to count positively, and vice versa. Another way1 2 of seeing this is to note that if al le lo gram is degenerate and there should be no flux.$\Delta^{1}x = \Delta^{2}x$, then the par- ograms, triangles, etc.; this leads to an equivalent concept of the integral.5.
One could also use infinitesimal oriented rectangles, parallel-

III. Mathematical Concepts

Antisymmetry follows from this and the bilinearity. A2-formω is a continuous assignment of a functionalωx If with these properties to each pointω is a 2-form and φ:[0, 1]2 \to Rn is a continuous lyx. differentiable function, we can now define the integralω of ω“against”φ (or, more precisely, the inte- gral against the image under[φ0, 1]2) by the approximation φ of the oriented squareω . pprox  ωx i(. elta(x1), i ∧ . elta(x2), i ), (10)φi

where the image ofinto parallelograms of dimensionsφ is (approximately) partitioned. elta x ∧ . elta x based at point sx . We do not need to decide what orde(r1)$, (i2)$, ii these parallelograms should be arranged in, because addition is both commutative and associative. One can show that the right-hand side of (10) converges to a unique limit as one makes the partition of parallelo - grams “increasingly fine,” though we will not make this precise here. We have thus shown how to integrate 2-forms against oriented two-dimensional surfaces.
More generally, onecan define the concept of ak-form on an n-dimensional manifold (such as Rn) for any 0 ⩽ k ⩽ n and inte- grate this against an orientedin that manifold. For instance, a 0-form on a manifoldk-dimensional surface X is the same thing as a scalar function f: X \to R, whose integral on a positively oriented point is zero dimensional) isf (x), and on a negatively ori - x (which ented pointx is - f (x).
A k-form tells us how to assign a value to an infinitesimal with dimensionsΔx ∧· · ·∧k-dimensional parallelepipedΔx , and hence to a portion ofwe have seen when$k$-dimensional “surface,” in much the same way as1 k = 2. By convention, ifk k . neq k^ , the integral of ak - dimensional form on a k^ -dimensional surface is understood to be zero. We refer to 0-forms, 1-forms, 2-forms, etc. (and formal sums and differences there of), collectively as differential forms. perform on scalar functions:
addition pointwise product There are three fundamental operations that one can(f $, g) \to f g$, and differentiation(f , g) \to  f + g, f \to  df , although the last of these is not especially use- ful unless at i ons have various relationships with each other. Forfis continuously differentiable. These op er instance, the product is distributive over addition,

$f (g + h) = f g + f h$,

and differentiation is a product: derivation with respect to the d$(f g) = (df )g + f (dg)$.

III.16. Differential Forms and Integration

these operations to differential forms. Adding a pair It turns out that one can generalize all three of of forms is easy: if[0,1]k \to Rnis a continuously differentiable function,ω and η are two k-forms and φ: thenφ(ω + η)is defined to beφ ω +φ η. One multi- plies forms using the so-call edk-form and η is an l-form, then wedge productω ∧η is a (k +.
Ifl)-form.ω is a Roughly speaking, given a$(k + l)$-dimensional infinitesimal parallelepiped with base pointΔx ∧ · · · ∧ Δx , one evaluates ωxandand dimensionsη at the par- all el ep ip eds with base point· · · ∧1 Δx and Δk +xl ∧ · · · ∧xΔand dimensionsx , respectively, andΔx1 ∧ multiplies the results together.(kk()+1()k)+l tiablethat measures something like the “rate of change” of As for differentiation, ifk-form, then its derivative dωis a continuously differ en-ω is a (k + 1)-formω.
To see what this might mean, and in particular to seewhy dω is a (k + 1)-form, let us think how we might answer a question of the following kind. We are givena spherical surface in R3 and a flow, and we would like to know the net flux out of the surface: that is, the dif-ference between the amount of flux coming out and the amount going in. One way to do this would be to approximate the surface of the sphere by a union of tiny parallelograms, to measure the flux through each one, and to take the sum of all these fluxes.
another would be to approximate the solid sphere by a union of tiny parallelepipeds, to measure the net flux out of each of these, and to add up the results. If a parallelepiped is small enough, then we can closely approximate the net flux out of it by looking at the difference, for each pair of opposite faces, between the amount coming out ofthe parallelepiped through one and the amount going into it through the other, and this will depend on the rate of change of the 2-form.
parallelepipeds is more rigorously described as inte-The process of summing up the net fluxes out of the grating a 3-form over the solid sphere. In this way, onecan see that it is natural to expect that information about how a 2-form varies should be encapsulated in a 3-form. a little bit of algebra and is omitted here. However, The exact construction of these operations requires we remark that they obey similar laws to their scalar counterparts, except that there are some sign changes that are ultimately due to the antisymmetry (9).
For instance, if commutative law for multiplication becomesω is a k-form and η is an l - form, theω ∧ η = (-1)klη ∧ ω, 179 basically because dimensions with lkl dimensions; and the derivation rule swaps are needed to interchange k for differentiation becomes d(ω ∧ η) = (dω) ∧ η + (-1)kω ∧ (dη). Another rule is that the differentiation operator d isnilpotent: d(dω) = 0. (11) This may seem rather unintuitive, but it is fund a men-tally important. To see why it might be expected, let us think about differentiating a 1-form twice.
The orig-inal 1-form associates a scalar with each small line segment.
Its derivative is a 2-form that associates a scalar with each small parallelogram. This scalar essentially measures the sum of the scalars given by the 1-formas you go around the four edges of the parallelogram, though to get a sensible answer when you pass to the limit you have to divide by the area of the parallelo-gram. If we now repeat the process, we are looking at a sum of the six scalars associated with the six faces of a parallelepiped.
But each of these scalars in turn comes from a sum of the scalars associated with the four directed edges around the corresponding face, and each edge is therefore counted twice (as it belongs totwo faces), once in each direction. Therefore, the contributions from each edge cancel and the sum of all contributions is zero.
tween integrating a 2-form over the surface of a sphere The description given earlier of the relationship beand integrating its derivative over the solid sphere canbe thought of as a generalization of the fundamental theorem of calculus, and can itself be generalized considerably: Stokes’s theorem is the assertion that for any oriented manifold oriented boundary of SSd(which we will not define here).ωS=and form. artial S ω ω, where . artial S is the(12) Indeed one can view this theorem as a definition of the derivative operationω \to dω;
thus, differentiation is the identity (11) is dual to the geometric observation that adjoint of the boundary operation. (For instance, the the boundary boundary:∂(∂S)∂S = ∅of an oriented manifold itself has no.) As a particular case of Stokes’s theorem, we see that dω = 0 whenever S is a closed S

manifold, i.e., one with no boundary. This observation lets one extend the notions of closed and exact forms to general differential forms, which (together with (11)) allows one to fully set up We have already seen that 0-forms can be identified de Rham cohomology. with scalar functions. Also, in Euclidean spaces one can