# Genus

III . $35$ .

Hamiltonians

without reference to the individual numbers a n . For example, one important generating function has the √ formula $f(x) = (1 - 1 - 4x)/2x$ . In such cases, one can deduce properties of the sequence $a^{0}$ , $a^{1}$ , $a^{2}$ , . . . from properties of f , rather than the other way round. For more on generating functions, see enumerative and algebraic combinatorics [IV.18](/part-04/enumerative-and-algebraic-combinatorics) and transforms [III.91](/part-03/transforms). III . $33$

Genus

The genus is a topological invariant of surfaces: that is, a quantity associated with a surface that does not change when the surface is continuously deformed. Roughly speaking, it corresponds to the number of holes of that surface, so a sphere has genus $0$ , a torus has genus $1$ , a pretzel shape (that is, the surface of a blown-up figure eight) has genus $2$ , and so on.
If one triangulates an orientable surface and counts the vertices, edges, and faces in the triangulation, denoting their numbers by V , E, and F , respectively, then the Euler characteristic is defined to be V  -  E  +  F . It can be shown that if g is the genus and χ is the Euler characteristic, then $χ = 2 - 2g$ . See [I.4](/part-01/general-goals) for a fuller discussion. A famous result of poincaré [VI.61](/part-06/jules-henri-poincar-18541912) states that for every nonnegative integer g there is precisely one orientable surface of genus g.
(Moreover , genus can also be defined for nonorientable surfaces, where a similar result holds .) See differential topology [IV.7](/part-04/dierential-topology) for more about this theorem. One can associate an orientable surface, and therefore a genus, with a smooth algebraic curve. An elliptic curve [III.21](/part-03/elliptic-curves) can be defined as a smooth curve of genus $1$ . See algebraic geometry [IV.4](/part-04/algebra) for more details. III . $34$ Graphs A graph is one of the simplest of all mathematical structures:
it consists of some elements called vertices (of which there are usually just finitely many), some pairs of which are deemed to be “joined” or “adjacent.” It is customary to represent the vertices by points in a plane and to join adjacent points by a line. The line is referred to as an edge (though how the line is drawn or visualized is irrelevant: all that is important is whether or not two points are joined). For example, the rail network of a country can be represented by a graph:
we can use vertices to represent $215$ the stations, and we can join two vertices if they represent consecutive stations along some railroad. Another example is provided by the Internet: the vertices are all the world’s computers, and two are adjacent if there is a direct link between them. Many questions in graph theory take the form of asking what some structural property of a graph can tell you about its other properties. For example, suppose that we are trying to find a graph with n vertices that does not contain a triangle (defined to be a set of three vertices that are mutually joined).
How many edges can the graph have? Clearly $\frac{1}{4}n^{2}$ is possible, at least if n is even, since one can then divide up the n vertices into two equal classes and join all vertices in one class to all vertices in the other. But can there be more edges than that? Here is another example of a typical question about graphs. Let k be a positive integer. Must there exist an n such that every graph with n vertices always contains either k vertices that are all joined to each other or k vertices no two of which are joined to each other?
This question is quite easy for $k = 3($ where $n = 6$ suffices), but already for k $= 4$ it is not obvious that such an n exists. For more on these problems (the first is the founding problem of “extremal graph theory,” while the second is the founding problem of “Ramsey theory ”) and on the study of graphs in general, see extremal and probabilistic combinatorics [IV.19](/part-04/extremal-and-probabilistic-combinatorics). III . $35$ Hamiltonians

Terence Tao

At first glance, the many theories and equations of modern physics exhibit a bewildering diversity: for instance, compare classical mechanics with quantum mechanics, or nonrelativistic physics with relativistic physics, or particle physics with statistical mechanics. However, there are strong unifying themes connecting all of these theories.
One of these is the remarkable fact that in all of them the evolution of a physical system over time (as well as the steady states of that system) is largely controlled by a single object, the Hamiltonian of that system, which can often be interpreted as describing the total energy of any given state in that system. Roughly speaking, each physical phenomenon (e . g . , ele ct ro magnetism, atomic bonding, particles in a potential well, etc .) may correspond to a single Hamiltonian H, while each type of mechanics (classical , quantum, statistical, etc .) corresponds to a different way