# Hilbert Spaces

III.37. Hilbert Spaces

point of the energy functional is used to establish the existence of harmonic maps E[U]. This heat equation and to construct a continuous deformation of a givenmapΦ(0, ·) to a harmonic map Φ(+. nfty, ·). The curva- ture assumption on the target manifold ble for the crucial monotonicity properties of the har-N is responsi- monic map heat flow, which come to light through theuse of the energy estimates. mation principle of this kind appears in the three-dimensional An even more spectacular application of a defor-ricci flow [III.78](/part-03/ricci-flow)

∂

This is aricsg (t)quasilinear on a given manifold∂t gheat evolution of a family of met-ij = −2 Ricij(g).M. In this case the flow is not necessarily regular; nonetheless, it can beextended as a flow with “surgeries” in such a way that$ij$ the structure of the surgeries and the long-term behav-ior of the flow can be precisely analyzed. This analysis shows in particular that any three-dimensional sim-ply connected manifold is diffeomorphic to a three dimensional sphere, which gives the proof of the Poincaré conjecture.
important in the analysis oftems The long-term behavior of the heat equation is alsoand associated biological phenomena. This was reaction–diffusion sys suggested already in the work ofhis attempt to understand morphogenesis turing [VI.94](/part-06/alan-turing-19121954) in(the formation of in homogeneous patterns such as animal-coat patterns from a nearly homogeneous initial state) by means of exponential instabilities in the reaction–diffusion equations $\partial u = \mu\Delta u + f (u$, v)$, \partial v = \nu\Delta v + g(u$, v).
the heat equation, and in particular the tendency of its solutions to converge to an equilibrium, or alternatively These examples emphasize the long-term behavior of∂t ∂t to develop exponential instabilities. However, it turnsout that the short-term behavior of the heat equation on a manifold tion with the geometry and topology of M is of the utmost importance in connec-M. This connec- tion is twofold: first, one seeks to establish a relation-ship between the spectrum ofΔ and the geometry of Mbehavior to prove; second, one can use an analysis of the short-termindex theorems M .
The former aspect, in the context of planar domains, is captured by Marc Kac’s well-known question, “Can one hear the shape of a drum?” For manifolds it begins with the$\infty\text{Weylformula}$ e$- tλ^{i} = (4πt)1^{n}/ {}^{2} (Vol(M) + O(t))i = 0$

219

astrace of the heat kernel oft tends to 0. The left-hand side of the identity is theΔ . That is, M. nfty

where equationp(t, x, y)i=∂u/∂t0 e-t. ambda i-=is such that any solution of the heatΔtr e(u-t)Δ=M =0 with M p(t, x, x)u(0, x) d=x, u (x) is given by the expression$M^{0}u(t$, x) =M p(t, x, y)u0(y) dy.

The right-hand side of the Weyl identity reflects theshort-term asymptotics of the heat kernelp(t, x, y). orems can be viewed as a refinement of both sides of The heat-flow approach to the proof of the index thethe Weyl identity. The trace on the left-hand side isreplaced by a more complicated “super-trace,” while the right-hand side involves full asymptotics of the heat kernel, which requires one to understand subtle cancelations. The simplest example of this kind is the Gauss–Bonnet formula

$χ(M) = 2π^{M} R$,

which connects the Euler characteristic of a two-dimen-sional manifold M and the integral of its scalar curva- ture. The Euler characteristic combination of traces of the heat flows associated withχ(M) arises from a linear the Hodge Laplacian(d + d*)2 restricted to the space of exterior differential 0-forms, 1-forms, and 2-forms. A proof of a general atiyah–singer index theorem [V.2](/part-05/the-atiyahsinger-index-theorem) involves heat flows associated with an operator given by the square of a Dirac operator.
III.37 Hilbert Spaces The theory ofmaps [I.3 §4.2](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) underpins a large part of mathematics.vector spaces [I.3 §2.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) and linear However, angles cannot be defined using vector space concepts alone, since linear maps do not in general pre-serve angles. An inner product space can be thought of as a vector space with just enough extra structure for the notion of angle to make sense. space is the standard scalar product defined onspace of all real sequences of length The simplest example of an inner product on a vector$n$, as follows.
 If Rn, thev sequences, then their scalar product, denoted= (v1,. . . , vn) and w = (w1, . . . , wn) are two suchv, w , is the sumthe scalar product of$v^{1}w^{1} + v^{2}w(3^{2}$,2+ · · · +$,-1) andvnw(1n$,4. (For example,,4) is 3 . imes 1 + 2 . imes 4 + (-1) . imes 4 = 7.) 220 the following two. Among the properties that the scalar product has are (i) It is linear in each variable separately. That is,$\lambda u + \mu v, w = \lambda u, w + \mu v, w$ for any three vectors and similar lyu, v, andu, . ambda vw +and any two scalars\mu w = . ambda u, v + \mu. ambda u, wand \mu.
, (ii) The scalar product itself is always a nonnegative real number, and isv, v of any vector v with zero only ifv is zero. In a general vector space, any function vectorsv and w that has these two properties is calledv, w of pairs of an inner product, and a vector space with an inner prod-uct is called an inner product space. If the vector space has complex scalars, then instead of (i) one must use the following modification. (i) For any three vectors u, v, and w and any two scalars and$u$, . ambda v. ambda and+\mu\mu w, . ambda u =+\mu v,$\bar{w}\lambda u$, v = +λ\m. ar{u}$u$, wu, w+.
That is,\mu v, w , the inner product isvariable. conjugate-linear in the second inw The reason this has anything to do with angles is that Rworks out as the length of2 and R3 the scalar product of two vectorsv times the length ofv andw times the cosine of the angle between them. In particu-lar, since a vectorv makes an angle of zero with itself, v, v This gives us a natural way tois the square of the length ofdefinev.length and angle in an inner product space. The length, orvectorv , denoted v , is v, v .
Given two vectors norm, of av andthat it lies between 0 and$w$, the angle between them is defined by the factπ (or 180◦) and its cosine isv, w / v. um w. Once length has been defined, we can also talk about distance: the distancev and wis the length of their difference, ord(v, w) betweenv - w . This definition of distance satisfies the axioms for ametric space [III.56](/part-03/metric-spaces). From the notion of angle, we can say what it is forother: this simply means thatv and w to be orthogonal to eachv, w = 0.
beyond their ability to represent the geometry of two-and three-dimensional space. Where they really come The usefulness of inner product spaces goes far into their own is if they are infinite dimensional. Then itbecomes convenient if they satisfy the additional property ofend of [III.62](/part-03/normed-spaces-and-banach-spaces). A complete inner product space is called completeness, which is briefly discussed at the a Hilbert space Two important examples of Hilbert spaces are the. following.

III. Mathematical Concepts

(i) tion of2 is the natural infinite-dimensional generaliza-Rn with the standard scalar product. It that the infinite sumis the set of all sequences converges. The inner product of|a1|2 + |(aa1$, a2(|2)2(a$, a+ |1$, a3 a$, . . . ()3)2|, a2 + · · ·3, . . . )such and(which can be shown to converge by the$(b1$, b2, b3, . . . ) is a1 b1 + a2 b2 + a3 cauchy–$b3 + · · ·$ (ii) schwarz inequality L2[0, 2π] is the set of all functions[V.19](/part-05/inequalities)). fdefined on the interval and 2π, such that the integral[0, 2π] of all real numbers between (02)π |f (x)|2 dx makes sense and is finite.
The inner product oftwo functions f and g in L [0,2π]is defined to be0 2π f (x)g(x) dx. (For technical reasons, this defi-2 nition is not quite accurate, as a nonzero function0 can have norm zero, but this problem can easilybe dealt with.) analysis. Aform cos The second of these examples is central to Fourier(mx)trigonometric functionor sin(nx). The inner product of anyis a function of the two different trigonometric functions is zero, so they are all orthogonal.
Even more importantly, the trigono-metric functions serve as a coordinate system for the spacecan be represented as an (infinite) linear combination L2[0,2π], in that every function f in the space of trigonometric functions. This allows Hilbert spacesto model sound waves: if the functionf represents a sound wave, then the trigonometric functions are thepure tones that are its constituent parts. trate a very important general phenomenon in thetheory of Hilbert spaces: that every Hilbert space has These properties of trigonometric functions illusan orthonormal basis.
This means a set of vectors$ei$

with the following three properties:

$\cdot e = 1 \text{for every i}$;

 i. dot . dot every vectorei, ej = 0 wheneverv in the space can be expressed as ai = j; and convergent sum of the form$i λ^{i}e^{i}$. The trigonometric functions do not quite form an orthonormal basis of$L$ [0,2π] but suitable multiples of them do. There are many contexts besides fourier analysis where one can obtain useful information about2 a vector by decomposing it in terms of a given orthonor - mal basis, and many general facts that can be deduced from the existence of such bases. Hilbert spaces (with complex scalars) are also central to quantum mechanics.
The vectors of a hilbert space can be used to represent possible states of a