# Linear and Nonlinear Waves and Solitons

234

bond, then the root vectors have the same length and
the angle between them is 120◦ . In diagrams that have
only single bonds, the root vectors span a set of lines
in Rn in which the angle between any two lines is either
90◦ or 60◦ . In the diagrams Bn , Cn , F4 , and G2 there are
arrows between certain pairs of nodes. The direction of
an arrow is from a long root to a short root: the ratio of
the root lengths is 2 in the first three cases and 3 in
the case of G2 . In these cases there are exactly two root
lengths, but in the single-bond cases all roots have the
same length.
  The An diagram is the one for sln+1 . The simple roots
are ei −ei+1 for 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, going from left to right on the    . . . , (n n + 1). Notice that the Dynkin diagrams for the
diagram. Notice that the inner product of two simple
roots is 0 unless they are adjacent on the diagram, in
which case it is −1. Each root ei − ej is a sum of simple
roots with coefficients all 1 or all −1 on a connected
segment of the diagram.
  The four infinite families An Bn , Cn , and Dn corre-
spond to the classical Lie algebras, of which sln+1 (R),
so(2 n + 1), sp(2 n), and so(2 n) are real forms. These
are the algebras associated with the classical Lie groups
SLn+1 (R), SO(2 n+1), Sp(2 n), and SO(2 n), respectively.
  As mentioned earlier, a simple Lie algebra g of rank n
decomposes as the direct sum of a Cartan subalgebra of
dimension n plus a set of one-dimensional root spaces,
one for each root. It follows that

Here are the dimensions of the simple Lie algebras:

   Each node of the diagram corresponds to a simple
root, and hence to a reflection across the hyperplane
perpendicular to that root. This set of reflections gen-
erates the Weyl group W in a particularly elegant way. If
si denotes the reflection corresponding to node i, then
W is generated by elements si of order 2, subject only
to the relations

III. Mathematical Concepts
where mij is the order of si sj (see [IV.10 §2](/part-04/geometric-and-combinatorial-group-theory) for a dis-
cussion of generators and relations). These orders are
determined by the diagram according to the following
rules:
(i) si sj has order 2 if there is no bond;
(ii) si sj has order 3 if there is a single bond;
√(iii) si sj has order 4 if there is a double bond; and
(iv) si sj has order 6 if there is a triple bond.
For example, the Weyl group of type An is isomor-
phic to the symmetric group [III.68](/part-03/permutation-groups) Sn+1 , and one
can take s1 , . . . , sn to be the transpositions (1 2), (2 3),
Bn and Cn root systems yield the same Weyl group.
In principle, this classification of root systems leads
to a classification of all semisimple finite-dimensional
Lie algebras and Lie groups. However, there are many
fundamental questions about simple Lie algebras and
Lie groups that remain only partly understood. For
instance, one particularly important aim of Lie theory is
to understand the linear representations of a given Lie
group or Lie algebra; roughly speaking, a linear repre-
sentation is a way of interpreting an abstract Lie group
or Lie algebra as a linear Lie group or Lie algebra by
assigning a matrix to each of its elements. While the
representations of all the simple Lie algebras and Lie
groups have been classified and described explicitly,
dim g = the rank of g + the number of roots.
and answering basic questions (such as how a given rep-
resentation decomposes into simpler representations)
dim An = n + n(n + 1) = n(n + 2),
combinatorics.
dim Bn = n + 2 n2 = n(2 n + 1),
The theory of root systems outlined above can also be
dim Cn = n + 2 n2 = n(2 n + 1),
dim Dn = n + 2 n(n − 1) = n(2 n − 1),
dim G2 = 2 + 12 = 14,
described in vertex operator algebras [IV.17](/part-04/vertex-operator-algebras)) and
dim F4 = 4 + 48 = 52,
algebraic combinatorics.
dim E6 = 6 + 72 = 78,
dim E7 = 7 + 126 = 133,
dim E8 = 8 + 240 = 248.
Richard S. Palais
1    John Scott Russell and the
Great Wave of Translation
To the world at large, John Scott Russell is known
as the naval architect who designed The Great East-
ern, a steamship larger than any built before. But long
(si sj )mij = 1,                          after The Great Eastern has been forgotten, Russell will

III.49.   Linear and Nonlinear Waves and Solitons

be remembered by mathematicians as the man who,
despite limited mathematical training and background,
was the first person to recognize the highly impor-
tant mathematical concept known as a soliton, which
he referred to as “the great wave of translation.” Here
is his oft-quoted passage in which he describes how he
first became acquainted with it:
  I was observing the motion of a boat which was rapidly
  drawn along a narrow channel by a pair of horses, when
  the boat suddenly stopped—not so the mass of water
  in the channel which it had put in motion; it accumu-
  lated round the prow of the vessel in a state of violent
  agitation, then suddenly leaving it behind, rolled for-    sophisticated nonlinear mathematical treatment by
  ward with great velocity, assuming the form of a large
  solitary elevation, a rounded, smooth and well-defined
  heap of water, which continued its course along the
  channel apparently with out change of form or diminu-
  tion of speed. I followed it on horseback, and over-
  took it still rolling on at a rate of some eight or nine   years before the full importance of the great wave of
  miles an hour, preserving its original figure some thirty   translation was recognized, after which it became an
  feet long and a foot to a foot and a half in height. Its   object of intensive study for the rest of the twentieth
  height gradually diminished, and after a chase of one
  or two miles I lost it in the windings of the channel.
  Such, in the month of August 1834, was my first chance
  interview with that singular and beautiful phenomenon
  which I have called the Wave of Translation.
You may feel that there is nothing unusual about what
Russell describes here, and indeed many before and
since have watched this same scenario play out with-
out noticing anything out of the ordinary. But Russell
was very familiar with wave phenomena and had a sci-
entist’s keenly observant eye. What struck him was the
remarkable stability of the bow wave as it traveled over     represent space and time, respectively. “Space” is one
a long distance. He knew that if one tried to create
a traveling water wave on, say, a calm lake, it would
soon disperse into a train of smaller wavelets—it would
not just go marching along as a single “heap” over a
long distance. There was clearly something very special
about water waves traveling in a narrow and shallow
channel.
  Russell became fascinated—even a little obsessed—
with his discovery. He built a wave tank behind his
home and proceeded to do extensive experiments,
recording the results as data and sketches in his note-
books. He found, for example, that the speed of a soli-
ton depended on its height, and he was even able to dis-
cover the correct formula for the speed as a function
of height. More surprising still, in Russell’s notebooks
one finds remarkable sketches of a two-soliton inter-
action—something that would evoke amazement when

235
it was rediscovered as a rigorous solution to the Kd V
equation (see section 3 below) more than a hundred
years later.
However, as we shall see, solitons are very much a
nonlinear phenomenon, and when some of the best
mathematicians of Russell’s day, notably Stokes and
Airy, tried to understand Russell’s observations using
the linearized theory of water waves that was then
available, they failed to find any trace of soliton-like
behavior and expressed doubts that what Russell had
seen was real.
It was not until after Russell’s death, with the more
Boussinesq in 1871 and by Korteweg and de Vries in
1895, that Russell’s careful observations and experi-
ments were at last seen to be in complete agreement
with mathematical theory. And it took another seventy
century.
2   The Korteweg–de Vries Equation
Russell (1844)    Korteweg and de Vries were the first people to derive
the appropriate differential equation to describe the
motion of a wave in a shallow channel. We can write
their equation, usually called the Kd V equation, in a
succinct form as follows:
ut + uux + δ2 uxxx = 0.
Here, u is a function of two variables, x and t, which
dimensional, so x is a real number, and u(x, t) repre-
sents the height of the wave at x at time t. The nota-
tion ut is shorthand for ∂u/∂t; similarly, ux stands for
∂u/∂x and uxxx stands for ∂ 3 u/∂x 3 .
This is an example of an evolution equation: if, for
each t, we write u(t) for the function from R to R that
takes x to u(x, t), then it describes how the function
u(t) “evolves” over time. The Cauchy problem for an
evolution equation is the problem of determining this
evolution from knowledge of its initial value u(0).
2.1   Some Model Equations
To put the Kd V equation into perspective, it is useful
to think briefly about three other evolution equations.
The first is the classic wave equation [I.3 §5.4](/part-01/fundamental-definitions)
utt − c 2 uxx = 0.

236

To solve the Cauchy problem for this equation, we
factor the wave operator (∂ 2 /∂t 2 ) − c 2 (∂ 2 /∂x 2 ) as a   this reason, the equation (1) is called dispersive.
product ((∂/∂t) − c(∂/∂x))((∂/∂t) + c(∂/∂x)). Then
we transform to so-called characteristic coordinates
ξ = x − ct, η = x + ct. The equation becomes
∂ 2 u/∂ξ∂η = 0, which clearly has the general solu-
tion u(ξ, η) = F (ξ) + G(η). Transforming back to
“laboratory coordinates” x, t, the general solution is
u(x, t) = F (x − ct) + G(x + ct). If the initial shape
of the wave is u(x, 0) = u0 (x) and its initial velocity
is ut (x, 0) = v(x, 0) = v0 (x), then an easy algebraic
computation gives the following very explicit formula:
  u(x, t) = 12 [u0 (x − ct) + u0 (x + ct)]
known as “d’Alembert’s solution” of the Cauchy prob-
lem for the wave equation.
  Note the geometric interpretation in the important
“plucked string” case, v0 = 0; the initial profile u0
breaks up into the sum of two “traveling waves,” both
with the same profile 12 u0 , one traveling to the right,
and the other to the left, both with speed c. It is an
easy exercise to derive d’Alembert’s solution using the
following hint: since u0 (x) = F (x) + G(x), u0 (x) =
F (x) + G (x), while v0 (x) = ut (x, 0) = −c F (x) +
c G (x).
  The next equation to think about is
which we can obtain from the Kd V equation if we drop
the nonlinear term uux . This equation is not just linear
but also translation invariant (meaning that if u(x, t)
is a solution, then so is u(x − x0 , t − t0 ) for any con-
stants x0 and t0 ). Such equations can be solved using
the fourier transform [III.27](/part-03/the-fourier-transform). Let us try to find a
“plane-wave” solution of the form u(x, t) = ei(kx−ωt) . If
we substitute this into (1), then we obtain the equation

and therefore the simple algebraic equation ω+k3 = 0.
This is called the dispersion relation of (1): with the
help of the Fourier transform it is not hard to show
that every solution is a superposition of solutions of
the form ei(kx−ωt) , and the dispersion relation tells us
how the “wave number” k is related to the “angular
frequency” ω in each of these elementary solutions.
  The function ei(kx−ωt) represents a wave that trav-
els at a speed of ω/k, which we have just shown to be
equal to −k2 . Therefore, the different plane-wave com-
pone nts of the solution travel at different speeds: the

III. Mathematical Concepts
higher the angular frequency, the greater the speed. For
What happens if instead we omit the uxxx term from
the Kd V equation? Then we obtain the inviscid Burgers
equation
ut + uux = 0.
The term uux can be rewritten as (∂/∂x)( 12 u2 ). Let us
. nfty
consider the integral −. nfty u(x, t) dx, which is a function
. nfty
of t. The derivative of this function is −. nfty ut dx, which
equation (2) tells us is equal to
. nfty
∂
−
−. nfty ∂x
which equals [− 12 u(x, t)2 ]. nfty
−. nfty . Therefore, if 2 u(x, t)
x+ct                                               . nfty
1                            vanishes at infinity, then −. nfty u(x, t) dx is a “constant
+        v0 (ξ) dξ,
2 c x−ct                      of the motion.” We say that the inviscid Burgers equa-
tion is a conservation law. (The argument we have just
used can be used for any equation of the form ut =
(F (u))x , where F is a smooth function of u and its
partial derivatives with respect to x. This is known
as the general conservation law. For example, taking
F (u) = −( 12 u2 +δ2 uxx ) gives rise to the Kd V equation.)
The inviscid Burgers equation (and other conserva-
tion laws where F is a function just of u) can be solved
using the method of characteristics. The idea of this
method is to look for smooth curves (x(s), t(s)) in the
xt-plane along which the solution to the Cauchy prob-
lem is constant. Suppose that s0 is such that t(s0 ) = 0,
ut = −uxxx ,                       (1)   and write x0 for x(s0 ). Then the constant value that
the solution u(x, t) will have to take along this curve is
u(x0 , 0), which we also write as u0 (x0 ). The deriva-
tive of u along this so-called characteristic curve is
(d/ds)u(x(s), t(s)) = ux x + ut t , so if we want the
solution to be constant along the curve, then we need
this to be 0. Therefore, using the fact that ut = −uux ,
we find that
dx     x (s)      ut
=
dt     t (s)      ux
−iωei(kx−ωt) = ik3 ei(kx−ωt) ,
u0 (x0 ). In other words, u has the constant value
u0 (x0 ) along the line x = x0 + u0 (x0 )t.
Note the following geometric interpretation of this
last result: to find the wave profile at time t (i.e., the
graph of the map x → u(x, t)), we translate each
point (x, u0 (x)) of the initial profile to the right by the
amount u0 (x)t. Suppose we look at a portion of the
initial profile where u0 is decreasing. Then the earlier,
and higher, parts of the initial wave are translated at a
greater speed (since u0 (x) is larger), so that the nega-
tive slope of the wave becomes more negative. Indeed,

III.49.   Linear and Nonlinear Waves and Solitons

after a finite time the earlier part of the wave “catches
up” with the later part, which means that we no longer
have a graph of a function. The first time at which
this sort of problem happens is called the “breaking
time,” since one can visualize it as the breaking of a
wave. This process is usually referred to as shock for-
mation, or steepening and breaking of the wave pro-
file: once again, the phenomenon occurs for many other
conservation laws.
2.2   Split-Stepping
Now let us return to the Kd V equation itself, in the form     erned wave motion in a shallow canal. They also showed
ut = −uux − uxxx . Why is it that this equation gives
rise to the remarkable stability of the solutions that
was observed experimentally by Russell? Intuitively,
the reason is that there is a balance between the dis-
persing effect of the uxxx term and the shock-forming
effect of the uux term.
   There turns out to be a very general technique for
analyzing balances of this kind. In the pure-math-
ematics community it is usually called the Trotter
product formula, while in the applied-mathematics
and numerical-analysis communities it is called split-
stepping. The rough idea is simple: as t increases to
t + Δt, you first change u to u − uxxx Δt, as would be
required by the equation ut = −uxxx , and then you
take a further step to u − uxxx Δt − uux Δt, the small
change required by the equation ut = −uux . To work
out the function u(t, x), you start at the initial function   They then did their own computer experiments, solv-
u0 and take a succession of alternating small steps of
this form. You then take the limit as the step size tends     corresponding to those used in the FPU experiments.
to zero.
   Split-stepping suggests a way to understand the
mechanism by which dispersion from uxxx balances
shock formation from uux in Kd V. If we imagine the
evolution of the wave profile as made up of a succession
of pairs of small steps in this way, then when u, ux , and    explained the anomalous results observed by Fermi,
uxxx are not too large, the steepening mechanism will
dominate. But as the time t approaches the breaking
time TB , u remains bounded (since it is made out of hor-     was unlike anything seen before in applied mathemat-
izontally translated parts of u0 ). It is not hard to prove   ics, and the search for an explanation of their remark-
that the maximum slope (that is, the maximum value of
ux ) blows up like the function (TB − t)−1 , while at the     the course of applied mathematics for the next thirty
same place uxxx blows up like the function (TB − t)−5 .
Thus, near the breaking time, and breaking point, the
uxxx term will dwarf the nonlinearity and will disperse
the incipient shock. Thus, the stability is caused by a
kind of negative feedback. Computer simulations show
just such a scenario playing out.

237
3   Solitons and Their Interactions
We have just seen that the Kd V equation expresses a
balance between dispersion from its third-derivative
term and the shock-forming tendency of its nonlin-
ear term, and in fact many models of one-dimensional
physical systems that exhibit mild dispersion and weak
nonlinearity lead to Kd V as the controlling equation at
some level of approximation.
In their 1894 paper, Korteweg and de Vries intro-
duced the Kd V equation and gave a convincing mathe-
mat ical argument that this was the equation that gov-
by explicit computation that it admitted traveling-wave
solutions that had exactly the properties that had been
described by Russell, including the relation of height to
speed that Russell had determined experimentally with
the help of his wave tank.
But it was only much later that further remarkable
properties of the Kd V equation became evident. In
1954, Fermi, Pasta, and Ulam (FPU) used one of the very
first digital computers to perform numerical exper-
iments on an elastic string with a nonlinear restor-
ing force, and their results contradicted the then cur-
rent expectations of how energy should distribute itself
among the normal modes of such a system. A decade
later, Zabusky and Kruskal reexamined the FPU results
in a famous paper in which they showed that the FPU
string was well approximated by the Kd V equation.
ing the Cauchy problem for Kd V with initial conditions
In the results of these simulations they observed the
first example of a “soliton,” a term that they coined
to describe a remarkable particle-like behavior (elastic
scattering) exhibited by certain Kd V solutions. Zabusky
and Kruskal showed how the coherence of solitons
Pasta, and Ulam. But in solving that mystery they had
uncovered a larger one: the behavior of Kd V solitons
able behavior led to a series of discoveries that changed
years. We shall now fill in some of the mathemat i-
cal details behind the above sketch, beginning with a
discussion of explicit solutions to the Kd V equation.
It is straightforward to find the traveling-wave solu-
tions of Kd V. First, we substitute a traveling wave
u(x, t) = f (x − ct) into Kd V, obtaining the ordinary

238

differential equation −cf + 6 f f + f = 0. If we add
as a boundary condition that f should vanish at infin-
ity, then a routine computation leads to the following
two-parameter family of traveling-wave solutions:

These are the solitary waves seen by Russell, and they
are now usually referred to as the 1-soliton solutions of
Kd V. Note that their amplitude, 2 a2 , is just half their
speed, 4 a2 , while their “width” is proportional to a−1 .
Thus, taller solitary waves are thinner and move faster.
  Next, following Toda, we will “derive”1 the 2-soliton
solutions of Kd V. Rewrite the 1-soliton solution as
u(x, t) = 2(∂ 2 /∂x 2 ) log cosh(a(x − 4 a2 t + δ)), or
u(x, t) = 2(∂ 2 /∂x 2 ) log K(x, t), where K(x, t) = (1 +

e2 a(x−4 a t+δ) ). We now try to generalize, looking for
solutions of the form u(x, t) = 2(∂ 2 /∂x 2 ) log K(x, t),
with K(x, t) = 1 + A1 e2η1 + A2 e2η2 + A3 e2(η1 +η2 ) , where
ηi = ai (x − 4 a2 i t + di ), and we shall choose the Ai and
di by substituting into Kd V and seeing what works. One
can check that Kd V is satisfied for u(x, t) of this form
and arbitrary A1 , A2 , a1 , a2 , d1 , d2 , provided that we
define A3 = ((a2 − a1 )/(a1 + a2 ))2 A1 A2 , and solutions
of Kd V arising in this way are called the Kd V 2-soliton
solutions.
  It can now be shown that for these choices of a1 and
a2 ,

  u(x, t) = 12

In particular, u(x, 0) = 6 sech2 (x), u(x, t) is asymptot-
ically equal to 2 sech2 (x−4 t−φ)+8 sech2 (x−16 t+ 2 φ)
when t is large and negative, and u(x, t) is asymptoti-
cally equal to 2 sech2 (x−4 t+φ)+8 sech2 (x−16 t− 2 φ)
when t is large and positive, where φ = 3 log(3).
   Note what this says. If we follow the evolution from
−T to T (where T is large and positive), we first see the
superposition of two 1-solitons: a larger and thinner
one to the left of, and catching up with, a shorter, fatter,
and slower-moving one to the right. Around t = 0 they
merge into a single lump (with the shape 6 sech2 (x)),
and then they separate again, with their original shapes
restored—but now the taller and thinner one is to the
right. It is almost as if they had passed right through
each other. The only effect of their interaction is the
pair of phase shifts: the slower one is retarded slightly
from where it would have been, and the faster one is
slightly ahead of where it would have been. Except for
these phase shifts, the final result is what we might
  1. This is a complete swindle! Only knowledge of the form of the     Propagation. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, volume 1640,
solutions allows us to make the clever choice of K.

III. Mathematical Concepts
expect from a linear interaction. It is only if we look
closely at the interaction as the two solitons meet that
we can detect its highly nonlinear nature. (Note, for
example, that at time t = 0, the maximum amplitude,
u(x, t) = 2 a2 sech2 (a(x − 4 a2 t + d)).
imum amplitude, 8, of the taller wave when they are
separated.) But of course the really striking fact is the
resilience of the two individual solitons: their ability
to put themselves back together after the collision. Not
only is no energy radiated away, but their actual shapes
are preserved. (Remarkably, Russell (1844, p. 384) gives
a sketch of a 2-soliton interaction experiment that he
had carried out in his wave tank!)
Now back to the computer experiment of Zabusky
2
with the case of periodic boundary conditions: in effect,
studying the Kd V equation ut + uux + δ2 uxxx = 0
(which they label (1)) on the circle instead of on the
line. For their published report, they chose δ = 0.022
and used the initial condition u(x, 0) = cos(π x). With
the above background in mind, it is interesting to read
the following extract from their 1965 report, which
contains the first use of the term “soliton”:
(I) Initially the first two terms of Eq. (1) dominate and
the classical over taking phenomenon occurs; that is u
steepens in regions where it has negative slope. (II) Sec-
ond, after u has steepened sufficiently, the third term
3 + 4 cosh(2 x − 8 t) + cosh(4 x − 64 t)
.
[cosh(3 x − 36 t) + 3 cosh(x − 28 t)]2
wavelength (of order δ) develop on the left of the front.
1
The amplitudes of the oscillations grow, and finally
each oscillation achieves an almost steady amplitude
1               (that increases linearly from left to right) and has the
1                          shape of an individual solitary-wave of (1). (III) Finally,
each “solitary wave pulse” or soliton begins to move
uniformly at a rate (relative to the background value
of u from which the pulse rises) which is linearly pro-
portion al to its amplitude. Thus, the solitons spread
apart. Because of the periodicity, two or more solitons
eventually overlap spatially and interact nonlinearly.
Shortly after the interaction they reappear virtually
unaffected in size or shape. In other words, solitons
“pass through” one another with out losing their iden-
tity. Here we have a nonlinear physical process in which
interacting localized pulses do not scatter irreversibly.
Zabusky and Kruskal (1965)
Further Reading
Lax, P. D. 1996. Out line of a Theory of the Kd V Equa-
tion in Recent Mathematical Methods in Nonlinear Wave
pp. 70–102. New York: Springer.