# Metric Spaces

III . $56$ .

Metric Spaces

What we want is a notion of length that applies to all the sets we know and are used to, and is additive, meaning that the length of A∪B is the sum of the lengths of A and B whenever A and B are disjoint. Remarkably, this can be achieved, and the key idea is to allow countable covers. That is, we modify the above definition as follows: the length (or measure, to give it its usual name) of a set A is the infimum of $(b^{1} - a^{1}) + (b^{2} - a^{2}) +$ · · · , taken over all unions of intervals [a 1 , b 1]∪[a {}2, b2 ]∪· · · that cover A. Note that, thanks to the puzzle discussed earlier, the measure of the interval [a , b] is b  -  a, just as we would hope. It is also not hard to see that the measure of the set of rationals in [0 , 1] is zero, and it turns out that the measure of the irrationals in [0 , 1 ]$is$1 . Indeed, any countable set has measure zero. In many contexts, sets of measure zero are regarded as “negligible” or “of no importance.” It is worth mentioning that there are also sets of measure zero that are uncountable (an example is the cantor set [III.17](/part-03/dimension)). It turns out that, even with this definition, there are pairs of disjoint sets A and B such that the measure of A ∪ B is not the sum of the measures of A and B. However, it can be shown that for all “reasonable” sets the measure is additive. More precisely, one says that a subset of [0 , 1] is measurable if the measures of it and its complement add up to $1$ , as they should. If A and B are disjoint measurable sets, then the measure of their union is the sum of their measures. This is a very useful fact, since it can be shown that every set that arises naturally in mathematics, or that has an explicit definition, is measurable: intervals, finite unions of intervals, countable unions of intervals, Cantor sets, things involving rationals or irrationals, and so on. In fact, the union of any countable family of measurable sets is again measurable: one says that the measurable sets form a sigma-algebra. Even better, for measurable sets the measure is countably additive, meaning that the measure of a disjoint union of countably many measurable sets is the sum of the measures of the individual sets. More generally, in many other settings, one wants to end up with a sigma-algebra, containing all the sets one is interested in, on which we can define a countably additive measure, or “length function.” The above example is called Lebesgue measure on [0 , 1] . In general, whenever one wishes to define a countably additive measure, one always needs a result like the puzzle above in order to get started. $247$ An important sigma-algebra is the algebra of all Borel sets. This is the smallest sigma-algebra that contains all open and closed intervals. Roughly speaking, it is the collection of all sets that you can build out of open and closed intervals using countable unions and intersections. (However , this masks the fact that the building up process can be very complicated: there is in fact a transfinite hierarchy of Borel sets .) The sigma-algebra of all Borel sets is smaller than the sigma-algebra of all Lebesgue-measurable sets because an arbitrary set of measure zero does not have to be a Borel set. Borel sets are one of the basic notions of descriptive set theory [IV.22](/part-04/set-theory) : in a certain technical sense they are “easily describable.” Here is another example of a sigma-algebra with a countably additive measure: we could work in [0 , 1 ]2 (the unit square in the plane), and base our ideas upon rectangles instead of intervals. So we would define the measure of a set as the least total area of a sequence of rectangles that covers the set. This gives an elegant and powerful approach to integration: the integral of a function f  (  defined on [0 , 1 ] , say, and taking values in [0 , 1 ] ) is just defined to be the “area under its graph”: that is, the measure of the set { (x , y) : y $\le$ f (x) }. Many complicated-looking functions can now be integrated: for example, the function f that is $1$ on the rationals and $0$ on the irrationals is easily checked to have an integral, namely $0$ , whereas in earlier theories such as Riemann integration that function would be too rapidly varying to be integrable. This approach to integration gives rise to the socalled Lebesgue integral (further discussed in the article on lebesgue [VI.72](/part-06/henri-lebesgue-18751941)), which is one of the fundamental concepts in mathematics. It allows one to integrate a wide range of functions that are not Riemann integrable, but the main reason for its importance is not so much this as the fact that the Lebesgue integral has very good limiting properties that the Riemann integral lacks. For example, if $f^{1}$ , $f^{2}$ , . . . is a sequence of Lebesgue-integrable functions from [0 , 1 ]$to [0 , 1 ]$ and f n (x) converges to f (x) for every x, then f is Lebesgue-integrable and the Lebesgue integrals of the functions f n converge to the Lebesgue integral of f . III . $56$

Metric Spaces

There are many contexts in mathematics, especially in analysis, where one would like to say that two
