# Modular Arithmetic

III . $58$ .

Modular Arithmetic

multiplication and inversion), and a model of group theory is a set, equipped with such operations, such that the axioms hold. In other words, a model of group theory is nothing other than a group. So what does a “model of ZF” mean? The axioms of ZF mention one relation, namely “is an element of,” or “ $\in$ . ” A model of ZF is a set M, on which there is a relation E, such that all the axioms of ZF hold in S if we replace “ $\in$ ” by “E.” However, there is one very important difference between these two sorts of model.
When one first meets groups, one starts with some very simple examples, such as cyclic groups, or groups of symmetries of regular polygons, and one then builds up to more sophisticated examples such as the symmetric and alternating groups [III.68](/part-03/permutation-groups), and beyond. But this gentle process is not available for models of ZF. Indeed, since all of mathematics can be formulated in the language of ZF, it follows that every model of ZF has to contain a “copy” of the whole world of mathematics. This makes studying models of ZF rather difficult.
One aspect that is often found puzzling is the fact that a model of ZF is a set. This might seem to mean that there is a “universal” set (a set that has every set as a member), but from russell’s paradox [II.7](/part-02/foundations-crisis) it is easy to see that there can be no such set. The answer to this apparent problem is that the model M is indeed a set in the real mathematical universe, but that inside the model there is no universal set--in other words, there is no element x of M such that y Ex for every element y of M.
Thus, from the perspective of the model, the statement “there is no universal set” is true. See model theory [IV.23](/part-04/logic-and-model-theory) for more about models in general, and set theory [IV.22](/part-04/set-theory) for more about models of set theory. III . $58$ Modular Arithmetic Ben Green Is there a square number whose decimal expansion ends . . . $7$ ? Is 438345 divisible by $9$ ? For which positive integers $n$ is $n^{2} - 5a$ power of two? Is $n^{7} - 77$ ever a Fibonacci number? These questions, and more, can be answered using modular arithmetic.
Let us look at the first question. Listing the first few squares, $1$ , $4$ , $9$ , $16$ , . . . , one does not find any whose final digit is $7$ . In fact, writing down just $249$ the final digits, one gets the sequence $1$ , $4$ , $9$ , $6$ , $5$ , $6$ , $9$ , $4$ , $1$ , $0$ , $1$ , $4$ , $9$ , $6$ , $5$ , $6$ , . . . , which seems to repeat (and thus never contain the number 7). An explanation of this phenomenon is as follows. Let n be a number to be squared. We can always write n as a multiple of $10$ plus $a$ remainder; that is, $n = 10q + r$ , where $r \in{0}$ , $1$ , . . . , $9$ .
Now, if we square n we get n2 = (10 q + r)2= 100 q2 + 20 qr + r2= 10(10 q2 + 2 qr) + r2 . The only part of this expression that affects the final digit is the $r^{2}$ , which immediately explains why the sequence of last digits of squares repeats with period $10$ , and hence contains no $7s$ . Modular arithmetic is essentially just a notation for writing down arguments of this sort. If two numbers (like $n$ and $r$) leave the same remainder on division by $10$ , then we say that they are congruent modulo $10$ and write n ≡ r mod $10$ .
What we proved above is the statement that, if $n$ ≡ $r$ mod $10$ , then $n^{2}$ ≡ $r^{2}$ mod $10$ . Everything we have just said applies equally well if we replace $10$ by an arbitrary modulus m: if $n$ and $r$ leave the same remainder on division by m, then we say that $n$ and $r$ are congruent modulo m and we write n ≡ r mod m. Equivalently, $n$ and $r$ are congruent modulo m if m divides n - r . (An integer a is said to divide another integer b if b is an integer multiple of a .) The above argument is just one instance of the following general fact, which is not hard to prove:
if a ≡ a mod $m$ and $b$ ≡ b mod m, then ab ≡ a b mod m and $a + b$ ≡ $a + b$ mod  m. Now observe that $10$ ≡ $1$ mod $9$ . It follows that $10 \times 10$ ≡ $1 \times 1$ ≡ $1$ mod $9$ , and in fact that $10^{d}$ ≡ $1$ mod $9$ for any d $\in$ N . Suppose that we have a number N whose decimal expansion is a $da^{d} - {}^{1}$ · · · $a^{2}a^{1}a^{0}$ . This means that $N = a^{d}10^{d} + a^{d} - {}^{1}10^{d} - {}^{1} +$ · · · $+ a^{1}10 + a^{0}$ . Applying the rules of modular arithmetic, we get $N$ ≡ $a^{d} + a^{d} - {}^{1} +$ · · · $+ a^{1} + a^{0}$ mod $9$ .
This gives the well-known test for divisibility by $9$ : simply add up the digits of the number in base $10$ , and see if the result is divisible by $9$ . For the example N = 438345 the sum of the digits is $27$ , which is divisible by $9$ . So $N$ is a multiple of 9( in fact $N = 9 \times 48705)$ . If m is a modulus and n is an integer, then there is precisely one value of $r$ between $0$ and $m - 1$ such