# Quantum Groups

$272$

[IV.20](/part-04/computational-complexity) problems? The majority opinion is that they cannot, and indeed the statement that they cannot is becoming another of the many “plausible hypotheses” of complexity theory, but it would be good to have stronger reasons for believing in this statement, such as a proof subject to already-known plausible hypotheses in classical computation. III . $75$ Quantum Groups

Shahn Majid

There are at least three different paths that lead to the objects known today as quantum groups. They could be summarized briefly as quantum geometry, quantum symmetry, and self-duality. Any one of them would be a great reason to invent quantum groups and each of them had a role in the development of the modern theory.
$1$ Quantum Geometry One of the great discoveries in physics in the last century was that classical mechanics should be replaced by quantum mechanics, in which the space of possible positions and moment a of a particle is replaced by the formulation of position and momentum as mutually noncommuting operators. This non commutativity under lies Heisenberg’s “uncertainty principle,” but it also suggests the need for a more general notion of geometry in which coordinates need not commute. One approach to noncommutative geometry is discussed in operator algebras [IV.15](/part-04/operator-algebras).
 However, another approach is to note that geometry really grew out of examples such as spheres, tori, and so forth, which are lie groups [III.48](/part-03/lie-theory) or objects closely related to Lie groups. If one wants to “quantize” geometry, one should first think about how to generalize basic examples like this: in other words, one should try to define “quantum Lie groups” and associated “quantum” homogeneous spaces. The first step is to consider geometrical structures not so much in terms of their points but in terms of corresponding algebras.
For example, the group S$L^{2}$ (C) αβ is defined as the set of $2 \times 2$ matrices (γ δ) of complex numbers such that $αδ - βγ = 1$ . We can think of this as a subset of $C^{4}$ , and indeed not just a subset but a variety [III.95](/part-03/varieties). The natural class of functions associated with this variety is the set of polynomials in four variables (which are defined on $C^{4}$ ) restricted to the variety. However, if two polynomials take equal values on the III. Mathematical Concepts variety, then we identify them.
In other words, we take the algebra of polynomials in four variables a, b, c, and d and quotient [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) by the ideal [III.81](/part-03/rings-ideals-and-modules) generated by the polynomial $ad - bc - 1$ . (This construction is discussed in detail in arithmetic geometry [IV.5](/part-04/arithmetic-geometry).) Let us call the resulting algebra C [SL 2 ]. We can do the same for any subset X ⊂ C n that is defined by polynomial relations.
This gives us a precise one-to-one correspondence between subsets of this type and certain commutative algebras equipped with n generators. Let us write C [X] for the algebra that corresponds to X. As with many similar constructions (see , for example, the discussion of adjoint maps in duality [III.19](/part-03/duality)), a suitable map from X to Y gives rise to a map from C [Y] to C [X] .
More precisely, the map φ from X to Y has to be polynomial (in a suitable sense) and the resulting map from C [Y] to C [X] is an algebra homomorphism φ ∗ that satisfies the formula φ ∗ (p) (x) = p (φ x) for every x $\in$ X and p $\in$ C [Y]. Going back to our example, the set S$L^{2}$ (C) has a group structure  SL2(C). imes  SL2(C) \to  SL2(C) defined by the matrix product. The set $SL^{2}(C) \t\text{imes SL}^{2}(C)$ is a variety in $C^{8}$ and the matrix product depends in a polynomial way on the entries in the matrices, so we obtain an algebra homomorphism $\Delta$ :
$C[SL^{2} ]$ \to C$[SL 2 ]$ ⊗ C [SL 2 ], which is known as the coproduct. (The algebra C [SL 2] ⊗ C [SL 2] is isomorphic to C [SL 2 . imes SL 2 ] .) It turns out that $\Delta$ can be expressed by the formula a b a b a b $\Delta$ = ⊗ . c d c d c d This formula needs a word or two of explanation: the variables a, b, c, and d are the four generators of the algebra of polynomials in four variables (and hence of its quotient by $ad - bc - 1)$ , and the right-hand side is a shorthand way of saying that $\delta\text{a} = a$ ⊗ $a + b$ ⊗  c, and so on.
Thus, $\Delta$ is defined on the generators by a sort of mixture of tensor products [III.89](/part-03/tensor-products) and matrix multiplication. One can then show that the associativity of matrix multiplication in S$L^{2}$ is equivalent to the assertion that $(\Delta$ ⊗ $id)\Delta = (id$ ⊗ $\Delta)\Delta$ . To understand what these expressions mean, bear in mind that $\Delta$ takes elements of C [SL 2] to elements of C [SL 2] ⊗ C [SL 2]. Thus, when we apply the map ( $\Delta$ ⊗ id) $\Delta$ , for example, we begin by applying $\Delta,$ and there by creating an element of C [SL 2] ⊗ C [SL 2].
This element will be a linear combination of elements of the form p ⊗ q, each of which will then be replaced by $\Delta p$ ⊗ q.

III . $75$ .

Quantum Groups

Similarly, one can express the rest of the group structure of S$L^{2}$ (C) equivalently in terms of the algebra C [SL 2 ]. There is a counit map : C [SL 2 ] \to k, which corresponds to the group identity, and an antipode map $S$ : $C[SL^{2} ]$ \to  C$[SL 2 ],$ which corresponds to the group in version. The group axioms appear as equivalent properties of these maps, making C [SL 2] into a “Hopf algebra” or “quantum group.” The formal definition is as follows. Definition. A Hopf algebra over a field k is a quadruple (H , $\Delta,$  , S), where (i) H is a unital algebra over k; ( $ii) \Delta$ :
$H \to H$ ⊗  H,   : $H \to k$ are algebra homomorphisms such that $(\Delta$ ⊗ $id)\Delta = (id$ ⊗ $\Delta)\Delta$ and (⊗ $id)\Delta = (id$ ⊗   $)\Delta = id;$ (iii) S : H $\to$ H is a linear map such that m (id ⊗ S) $\Delta = m(S$ ⊗ $id)\Delta = 1$   , where m is the product operation on H. There are two great things about this formulation. The first is that the notion of a Hopf algebra makes sense over any field. The second is that no where did we demand that H was commutative.
Of course, if H is derived from a group, then it certainly is commutative (since multiplying two polynomials is commutative), so if we can find a noncommutative Hopf algebra, then we have obtained a strict generalization of the notion of a group. The great discovery of the past two decades is that there are indeed many natural noncommutative examples.
For example, the quantum group C q [SL 2] is defined as the free associative noncommutative algebra on symbols a, b, c, and d modulo the relations $ba =$ qab, $bc = cb, ca =$ qac, $dc =$ qcd, $db =$ qbd, $da = ad + (q - q - 1)bc$ , $ad - q - 1bc = 1$ . This forms a Hopf algebra with $\Delta$ given by the same formula as it is for C [SL 2] and with suitable maps   and S. Here q is a nonzero element of C , and as q $\to 1$ one obtains C [SL 2]. This example generalizes to canonical examples C q [G] for all complex simple Lie groups G.
Much of group theory and Lie group theory can be generalized to quantum groups. For example, Haar integration is a linear map : H $\to$ k that is translation invariant in a certain sense that involves $\Delta.$ If it exists, it is unique up to a scalar multiple, and it does indeed exist in most cases of interest, including all finite dimensional Hopf algebras. Likewise, the notion of a complex of differential forms [III.16](/part-03/dierential-forms-and-integration) ( $\Omega$ , d) makes

$273$

sense over any algebra H as a proxy for a differential structure. Here, $\Omega = n\Omega^{n}$ is required to be an associative algebra generated by $\Omega^{0} = H$ and $\Omega^{1}$ , but one does not assume that it is graded-commutative as in the classical case. When H is a Hopf algebra one can ask that $\Omega$ is translation invariant, again in a certain sense that involves the coproduct $\Delta.$ In this case both $\Omega$ and its cohomology [IV.6](/part-04/algebraic-topology) as a complex are super (or graded) quantum groups.
The axioms of a (graded) Hopf algebra were originally introduced by Heinz Hopf in 1947 precisely to express the structure of the cohomology ring of a group, so this result brings us back full circle to the origins of the subject. For most quantum groups, including all the C q [G] , one has a natural minimal complex ( $\Omega$ , d). Thus, a “quantum group” is not merely a Hopf algebra but has additional structure analogous to that of a Lie group. There are many other quantum groups that are not related to q-deformations. There are also applications of the theory to finite groups.
If G is a finite group, one has a corresponding algebra k (G) of all functions on G with pointwise product and a coproduct ( $\Delta$ f) (g , h) = f (gh) for f $\in$ k (G) and g, h $\in$ G. Here we identify k (G) ⊗ k (G) and k (G $\times$ G), which makes $\Delta f$ into a function of two variables, and one may check even more simply that this is a Hopf algebra.
There can never be an interesting classical differential structure on a finite set, but if we use the methods developed for quantum groups, then we have one or more translation-invariant complexes $(\Omega^{1}$ ,  d) on any finite group. Applying further parts of the theory of quantum group differential geometry, one finds, for example, that the alternating group $A^{4}$ is naturally Ricci-flat, while the symmetric group $S^{3}$ naturally has constant curvature [III.13](/part-03/curvature), much like $a_{3}$ - sphere .
$2$ Quantum Symmetry Symmetry in mathematics is usually expressed as the action of a group or Lie algebra of finite or infinitesimal transformations of some structure. If you have a collection of transformations that is closed under in version and composition, then you necessarily have an ordinary group. So how might one generalize this? The answer is that one begins by observing that a group G can act on several objects at the same time. If a group acts on two objects X and Y , then it also acts on their direct product X $\times$ Y , with g (x , y) = (gx , gy).
Here we are making implicit use of a diagonal or “duplication” map $\Delta$ : $G \to G \times G,$ which duplicates a group

274                                                                                        III. Mathematical Concepts

element so that one copy can act on the first object          [III.44](/part-03/knot-polynomials) (the Jones knot invariant comes from the exam-
and the other on the second object. In order to gener-       ple Uq (sl2 ), where sl2 is the Lie algebra of the group
alize this it once again pays to replace the notion of       SL2 (C)). The parameter q can usefully be regarded here
a group G by that of an algebra. This time we use the        as a formal variable, and these examples can be thought
group algebra k G, which is the set of all formal linear      of as some kind of deformation of the classical envelop-
               
combinations i . ambda i gi , where the gi are elements of G        ing algebras U(g). They arose originally in work of Drin-
and the . ambda i are scalars from the field k. The elements         feld and of Jimbo in the theory of quantum integrable
of G (considered as particularly simple linear combina-      systems.
tions of this kind) form a basis of k G and we multiply
them as we would in G itself. One then extends this                              3   Self-duality
definition to products of more general linear combi-
                                                             A third point of view is that Hopf algebras are the next
nations in the obvious way. We also extend Δ linearly
                                                             simplest category [III.8](/part-03/categories) after Abelian groups of struc-
from Δg = g ⊗ g on the basis elements to a map from
                                                             tures that admit a fourier transform [III.27](/part-03/the-fourier-transform). It is not
k G to k G ⊗ k G. Together with some associated maps
                                                             immediately obvious, but the axioms (i)–(iii) in the def-
 and S, this makes k G into a Hopf algebra. Note that
                                                             inition we gave earlier have a certain symmetry. One
this is a completely different use of the coproduct from
                                                             can write out the requirement (i) of a unital algebra H
the one in the previous section, since the group prod-
                                                             in terms of linear maps m : H ⊗ H → k and η : k → H
uct has already gone into the algebra. One has a similar
                                                             (here η specifies the identity element of H as the image
story for the “enveloping algebra” U(g) associated with
                                                             of 1 ∈ k) that have to obey some straightforward com-
any Lie algebra g; this is generated by a basis of g with
                                                             mutative diagrams. If you reverse all the arrows in
certain relations and becomes a Hopf algebra with the
                                                             these diagrams, then you have the axioms displayed in
coproduct Δξ = ξ ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ ξ “sharing out” an element
                                                             (ii), obtaining what could be called a “coalgebra.” The
ξ ∈ g for the purposes of acting on a tensor product of
                                                             requirement that the coalgebra structures Δ and  are
objects on which g acts.
                                                             algebra maps is given by a collection of diagrams that
   Extrapolating from these two examples, a general
                                                             is invariant under arrow reversal. Finally, the axioms
“quantum symmetry” means an algebra H equipped
                                                             in (iii), as commutative diagrams, are invariant under
with further structure Δ that allows one to form a ten-
                                                             arrow reversal in the above sense.
sor product V ⊗ W of any two representations V , W of
                                                                Thus, the axioms of a Hopf algebra have the spe-
the algebra in an associative manner. An element h ∈ H
                                                             cial property of being symmetric under arrow rever-
acts as h(v ⊗ w) = (Δh)(v ⊗ w), where one part of Δh
                                                             sal. A practical consequence is that if H is a finite-
acts on v ∈ V and another part on w ∈ W . This is
                                                             dimensional Hopf algebra, then so is H ∗ , with all
a second route to the Hopf algebra axioms we gave in
                                                             structure maps defined as the adjoints of those of
the previous section.
                                                             H (which necessarily reverses arrows). In the infinite-
   Note that, in the examples just given, Δ has had a
                                                             dimensional case one needs a suitable topological dual,
symmetric output. As a consequence, if V and W are
                                                             or one can just speak of two Hopf algebras as dually
representations of a group or Lie algebra, then V ⊗ W
                                                             paired to each other. For instance, Cq [SL2 ] and Uq (sl2 )
and W ⊗ V are isomorphic via the obvious map that
                                                             above are dually paired, while if G is finite then (k G)∗ =
takes v ⊗ w to w ⊗ v. In general, however, V ⊗ W and
                                                             k(G), the Hopf algebra of functions on G.
W ⊗V may be unrelated, so it is now the tensor product
                                                                As an application, let H be finite dimensional with
that is being made noncommutative. In nice examples it
                                                             basis {ea }, let H ∗ have a dual basis {f a }, and let
may be the case that V ⊗W  W ⊗V , but not necessarily
                                                             denote a right-translation-invariant integral on H. The
by the obvious map. Instead, there may be a nontriv-
                                                             Fourier transform F : H → H ∗ is defined as
ial isomorphism for every pair V , W , which may nev-
                                                                                       
er the less obey some reasonable conditions. This hap-                          F (h) =        ea h f a
pens for a large class of examples, denoted by Uq (g)                                  a

and associated with all complex simple Lie algebras.         and has many remarkable properties. A special case is
For these examples, the isomorphism obeys the braid          a Fourier transform F : k(G) → k G for any finite group
or Yang–Baxter relations among any three representa-         G, which does not have to be Abelian. If G happens to
tions (see braid groups [III.4](/part-03/braid-groups)). As a result, these quan-   be Abelian, then k G  k(Ĝ), where Ĝ is the group of
tum groups lead to knot and 3-manifold invariants            characters, and we recover the usual Fourier transform

III.76.   Quaternions, Octonions, and Normed Division Algebras                                                          275

                             Quantales                           tures with (de Morgan) duality. However, the connec-
                         ?
                                                                 tion between duality here and the other dualities is
           Quantum                              Heyting          speculative.
          field theory                          algebras
                              Group                              Further Reading
                              duals
                                                                 Majid, S. 2002. A Quantum Groups Primer. London Math-
                                                                  ematical Society Lecture Notes, volume 292. Cambridge:
      Monoidal       Quantum          Abelian     ?   Boolean
?                                                                 Cambridge University Press.
      functors        groups          groups          algebras

                                                                 III.76    Quaternions, Octonions, and
                             Groups
          Riemannian                            Co Heyting                  Normed Division Algebras
           geometry                              algebras
                              Uniform                            Mathematics took a leap forward in sophistication with
                                           ?                     the introduction of the complex numbers [I.3 §1.5](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). To
                               spaces
                                                                 define these, one suspends one’s disbelief, introduces a
    Figure 1 Putting quantum groups in context. Self-dual
                                                                 new number i, and declares that i2 = −1. A typical com-
         categories are shown on the horizontal axis.
                                                                 plex number is of the form a + ib, and the arithmetic
                                                                 of complex numbers is easy to deduce from the nor-
for finite Abelian groups. The point is that in the non-          mal rules of arithmetic for real numbers. For example,
Abelian case, k G is not commutative and hence not the            to calculate the product of 1 + 2 i and 2 + i one simply
algebra of functions on any usual “Fourier dual” space.          expands some brackets:
  This point of view is responsible for the second main
                                                                            (1 + 2 i)(2 + i) = 2 + 5 i + 2 i2 = 5 i,
class of genuine quantum groups to have been dis-
covered, namely the “bicrossproduct” ones of self-dual           the last equality following from the fact that i2 = −1.
form. They are simultaneously “coordinate” and “sym-             One of the great advantages of the complex numbers
metry” algebras, and are truly connected with quantum            is that, if complex roots are allowed, every polynomial
mechanics. An example, which is written                          can be factorized into linear factors: this is the famous
                                                                 fundamental theorem of algebra [V.13](/part-05/the-fundamental-theorem-of-algebra).
                 C[R3 > R]λ  U (so(1, 3)),
                                                                    Another way to define a complex number is to say
is the so-called Poincaré quantum group of a certain             that it is a pair of real numbers. That is, instead of writ-
noncommutative spacetime with coordinates x, y, z, t,            ing a + ib one writes simply (a, b). To add two complex
where t does not commute with the other variables.               numbers is simple, and exactly what one does when
This quantum group can also be interpreted as the                adding two vectors: (a, b)+ (c, d) = (a+c, b +d). How-
quantization of a particle moving in a curved geom-              ever, it is less obvious how to multiply: the product of
etry with black-hole-like features. In essence, the self-        (a, b) and (c, d) is (ac − bd, ad + bc), which seems
duality of quantum groups provides a paradigm for                an odd definition unless one goes back to thinking of
“toy models” of the unification of gravity (as spacetime          (a, b) and (c, d) as a + ib and c + id.
geometry) and quantum theory.                                       Nevertheless, the second definition draws our atten-
   This is part of a wider picture indicated in figure 1.         tion to the fact that the complex numbers are formed
A category of objects with a coherent notion of “tensor          out of the two-dimensional vector space [I.3 §2.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) R2
product” is called a monoidal (or tensor ) category, and         with a carefully chosen definition of multiplication.
we have seen that this is the case for representations           This immediately raises a question: could we do the
of quantum groups. There, one also has a “forgetful              same for higher-dimensional spaces?
functor” to the category of vector spaces, which for-               As it stands, this question is not wholly precise, since
gets the quantum group action. This embeds quantum               we have not been clear about what “the same” means.
groups into the next most general self-dual category (in         To make it precise, we must ask what properties this
a representation-theoretic sense), namely that of func-          multiplication should have. So let us return to R2 and
tors between monoidal categories. Over on the right,             think about why it would be a bad idea to define the
I have included Boolean algebras as primitive struc-             product of (a, b) and (c, d) in a simple-minded way as

276                                                                                          III. Mathematical Concepts

(ac, bd). Of course, part of the reason is that the prod-       complex conjugates into that formula. Before we try to
uct of a + ib and c + id is not ac + ibd, but why should        do that, let us think about what we might mean by the
we not also be interested in other ways of multiplying          “conjugate” of a pair (z, w). We expect (z, 0) to behave
vectors in R2 ?                                                 like the complex number z, so its conjugate should be
   The trouble with this alternative definition is that          (. ar{z}, 0). Similarly, if z and w are real, then the conjugate
it allows zero divisors, that is, pairs of nonzero num-         of (z, w) should be (z, −w). This leaves us with two
bers that multiply together to give zero. For example,          reasonable possibilities for a general pair (z, w): either
it gives us (1, 0)(0, 1) = (0, 0). If we have zero divi-        (. ar{z}, −. ar{w}) or (. ar{z}, −w). Let us consider the second of these.
sors, then we cannot have multiplicative inverses, since           We would like the product of (z, w) and its conjugate,
if every nonzero number in a number system has a mul-           which we are defining as (. ar{z}, −w), to be (|z|2 + |w|2 , 0).
tiplicative inverse, and if xy = 0, then either x = 0 or        We want to achieve this by introducing complex conju-
y = x −1 xy = x −1 0 = 0. And if we do not have multi-          gates into the formula
plicative inverses, then we cannot define a useful notion
                                                                         (z, w)(u, v) = (zu − wv, zv + wu).
of division.
   Let us return then to the usual definition of the com-        An obvious way of getting the result we want is to take
plex numbers and try to think how we can go beyond it.                   (z, w)(u, v) = (zu − . ar{w}v, . ar{z}v + wu),
One way we might try to “do the same” as we did before
is to do to the complex numbers what we did to the real         and this modified formula, it turns out, defines an asso-
numbers. That is, why not define a “super-complex”               cia tive binary operation [I.2 §2.4](/part-01/language-and-grammar) on the set of pairs
number to be an ordered pair (z, w) of complex num-             (z, w). If you try the other definition of conjugate, you
bers? Since we still want to have a vector space, we will       will find that you end up with zero divisors. (A first
continue to define the sum of (z, w) and (u, v) to be            indication of trouble is that, under the other definition,
(z + u, w + v), but we need to think about the best way         the pair (0, i) is its own conjugate.)
of defining their product. An obvious guess is to use               We have just defined the quaternions, a set H of
precisely the expression that worked before, namely             “numbers” that form a four-dimensional real vector
(zu−wv, zv +wu). But if we do that, then the product            space, or alternatively a two-dimensional complex vec-
of (1, i) and (1, −i) works out to be (1+i2 , i −i) = (0, 0),   tor space. (The letter “H” is in honor of William Rowan
so we have zero divisors.                                       Hamilton, their discoverer. See hamilton [VI.37](/part-06/william-rowan-hamilton-18051865) for
   This example came from the following thought. The            the story of how the discovery was made.) But why
modulus of a complex number z = a + ib, which mea-              should we have wished to do that? This question
sures the length of the vector (a, b), is the real number       becomes particularly pressing when we notice that the
       √|z| = a2 + b2 . This can also be written as . ar{z}z, where          notion of multiplication that we have defined is not
. ar{z} is the complex conjugate a − ib of z. Now if a and           commutative. For example, (0, 1)(i, 0) = (0, i), while
b are allowed to take complex values, then there is no          (i, 0)(0, 1) = (0, −i).
reason for a2 + b2 to be nonnegative, so we may not be             To answer it, let us take a step back and think about
able to take its square root. More over, if a2 + b2 = 0          the complex numbers again. The most obvious justifi-
it does not follow that a = b = 0. The example above            cation for introducing those is that one can use them to
came from taking a = 1 and b = i and multiplying the            solve all polynomial equations, but that is by no means
number (1, i) by its “conjugate” (1, −i).                       the only justification. In particular, complex numbers
   There is, nevertheless, a natural way to define the           have an important geometrical interpretation, as rota-
modulus of a pair (z, w) that works even when z and w           tions and enlargements. This connection becomes par-
are complex numbers. The number |z|2 + |w|2 is guar-            ticular ly clear if we choose yet another way of writing
                                                                                                               −b
anteed to be nonnegative, so we can take its square             the complex number a + ib, as the matrix ( a b a ). Multi-
root. More over, if z = a + ib and w = c + id, then              plication by the complex number a + ib can be thought
we will obtain the number (a2 + b2 + c 2 + d2 )1/2 , which      of as a linear map [I.3 §4.2](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) on the plane R2 , and this
is the length of the vector (a, b, c, d).                       is the matrix of that linear map. For example, the com-
   This observation leads to another: the complex con-          plex number i corresponds to the matrix ( 01 −10 ), which
jugate of a real number is the number itself, so, if we         is the matrix of a counter clockwise rotation through
                                                                1
want to “use the same formula” for the complex num-             2 π about the origin, and this rotation is exactly what
bers as we used for the reals, we are free to introduce         multiplying by i does to the complex plane.

III . $76$ .

Quaternions, Octonions, and Normed Division Algebras If complex numbers can be thought of as linear maps from $R^{2}$ to $R^{2}$ , then quaternions should have an interpretation as linear maps from $C^{2}$ to $C^{2}$ . And indeed they do. Let us associate with the pair (z , w) the matrix z . ar{w}

$( - w$

. ar{z}). Now let us consider the product of two such matrices: $zu -$ . ar{w}v z. ar{v}  +  . ar{w} ū z . ar{w} u . ar{v}

 = / $- w$ . ar{z}

$- v$ ū

$- z$ ̄ $v - wu$ . ar{z} ū $- w$ . ar{v}

This product is precisely the matrix associated with the pair (zu  -  w . ar{v}, zv  +  w . ar{u}), which is the quaternionic product of (z , w) and (u , v) ! As an immediate corollary, we have a proof of a fact mentioned earlier: that quaternionic multiplication is associative. Why? Because matrix multiplication is associative. (And that is true because the composition of functions is associative: see [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions).) Notice that the determinant [III.15](/part-03/determinants) of the matrix z . ar{w} $22$ .
ar{z}) is $|z| + |w|$ , so the modulus of the pair (z , w) $( - w$ (which is defined to be $|z|^{2} + |w|^{2})$ is just the determinant of the associated matrix. This proves that the modulus of the product of two quaternions is the product of their moduli (since the determinant of a product is the product of determinants). Notice also that the adjoint of the matrix (that is, the complex conjugate of the . ar{z} - . ar{w} transpose matrix) is (w z), which is the matrix associated with the conjugate pair (. ar{z}$, - w)$. Finally, notice that if $|z|^{2} + |w|^{2} = 1$ , then . ar{z} - .
ar{w} z . ar{w} 1 0$= ,$- w . ar{z} w z 0 1 which tells us that the matrix is unitary [III.50](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties). Conversely, any unitary $2 \times 2$ matrix with determinant $1$ z . ar{w}. arz). There can easily be shown to have the form (  -  w fore, the unit quaternions (that is, the quaternions of modulus $1$ ) have a geometrical interpretation: they correspond to the “rotations” of $C^{2}$ (that is, the unitary maps of determinant $1$ ), just as the unit complex numbers correspond to the rotations of $R^{2}$ .
The group of unitary transformations of $C^{2}$ of determinant $1$ is an important lie group [III.48](/part-03/lie-theory) called the special unitary group SU ( $2$ ). Another important Lie group is the group SO ( $3$ ), of rotations of $R^{3}$ . Surprisingly, the unit quaternions can be used to describe this group as well. To see this, it is convenient to present the quaternions in another, more conventional, way.
Quaternions, as they are usually introduced, are a system of numbers where we introduce not just one square root of $- 1$ but three, called i, j, and k (together with their negatives). Once one knows that $i^{2} = j^{2} = k^{2} = - 1$ , and also that $ij = k,jk = i,$ and $ki = j,$ one has $277$ all the information one needs to multiply two quaternions. For example, $ji =$ jjk $= - k$ . A typical quaternion takes the form $a + ib + jc + kd$ , which corresponds to the pair of complex numbers (a + ic, b + id) in our previous way of thinking about quaternions.
Now if we want, we can think of this quaternion as a pair (a , v), where a is a real number and v is the vector (b , c, d) in $R^{3}$ . The product of (a , v) and (b , w) then works out to be (ab - v · w, aw + bv + v ∧ w), where v · $w$ and $v$ ∧ w are the scalar and vector products of $v$ and $w$. If $q = (a$ ,  u) is a quaternion of modulus $1$ , then $a^{2} +$ u ${}^{2} = 1$ , so we can write q in the form (cos $\theta,v$ sin $\theta)$ with v a unit vector. This quaternion corresponds to a counter clockwise rotation R about an axis in direction v through an angle of $2\theta$ .
This angle is not what one might at first expect, and neither is the way the correspondence works. If w is another vector, we can represent it as the quaternion ( $0$ , w). We would now like a neat expression for the quaternion ( $0$ , Rw); it turns out that ( $0$ , Rw) = q ( $0$ , w) q ∗ , where q ∗ is the conjugate (cos $\theta, - v$ sin $\theta)$ of q, which is also its multiplicative inverse, as q has modulus $1$ . So to do the rotation R, you do not multiply by q but rather you conjugate by q.
(This is a different meaning of the word “conjugate,” referring to multiplying on one side by q and on the other side by $q - 1$ .) Now if $q^{1}$ and $q^{2}$ are quaternions corresponding to rotations $R^{1}$ and $R^{2}$ , respectively, then $q^{2}q^{1}(0$ , $w)q^{1}$ ∗ $q^{2}$ ∗ $= q^{2}q^{1}(0$ , $w)(q^{2}q^{1})$ ∗ , from which it follows that $q^{2}q^{1}$ corresponds to the rotation $R^{2}R^{1}$ . This tells us that quaternionic multiplication corresponds to composition of rotations. The unit quaternions form a group, as we have already seen--it is SU ( $2$ ).
It might appear that we have shown that SU ( $2$ ) is the same as the group SO ( $3$ ) of rotations of $R^{3}$ . However, we have not quite done this, because for each rotation of $R^{3}$ there are two unit quaternions that give rise to it. The reason is simple: a counter clockwise rotation through $\theta$ about a vector v is the same as a counter clockwise rotation through $- \theta$ about $- v$ . In other words, if $q$ is a unit quaternion, then q and - q give rise to the same rotation of $R^{3}$ . So SU ( $2$ ) is not isomorphic to SO ( $3$ ); rather, it is a double cover of SO ( $3$ ).
This fact has important ramifications in mathematics and physics. In particular, it lies behind the notion of the “spin” of an elementary particle. Let us return to the question we were considering earlier: for which n is there a good way of multiplying vectors in R n ? We now know that we can do it for n $= 1$ ,

278                                                                                        III. Mathematical Concepts

2, or 4. When n = 4 we had to sacrifice commutativity,            All the number systems constructed above have a
but we were amply rewarded for this, since quaternion         notion of size given by a norm [III.62](/part-03/normed-spaces-and-banach-spaces). For real and com-
multiplication gives a very concise way of representing       plex numbers z, the norm of z is just its modulus. For
                                                                                                                  √
the important groups SU(2) and SO(3). These groups            a quaternion or octonion x, it is defined to be x ∗ x,
are not commutative, so it was essential to our suc-          where x ∗ is the conjugate of x (a definition that works
cess that quaternion multiplication should also not be        for real and complex numbers as well). If we write x
commutative.                                                  for the norm of x, then the norms constructed have
   One obvious thing we can do is continue the process        the property that xy = x y for every x and y.
that led to the quaternions. That is, we can consider         This property is extremely useful: for example, it tells
pairs (q, r ) of quaternions, and multiply these pairs        us that the elements of norm 1 are closed under mul-
together using the formula                                    tiplication, a fact that we used many times when dis-
                                                              cuss ing the geometric importance of complex numbers
           (q, r )(s, t) = (qs − r ∗ t, q∗ t + r s).
                                                              and quaternions.
Since the conjugate q∗ of a quaternion q is the ana-             The feature that distinguishes dimensions 1, 2, 4, and
logue of the complex conjugate . ar{z} of a complex number         8 from all other dimensions is that these are the only
z, this is basically the same formula that we used for        dimensions for which one can define a norm  ·  and a
multiplication of pairs of complex numbers—that is,           notion of multiplication with the following properties.
for quaternions.
                                                                (i) There is a multiplicative identity: that is, a num-
  However, we need to be careful: multiplication of
                                                                    ber 1 such that 1 x = x1 = x for every x.
quaternions is not commutative, so there are in fact
                                                               (ii) Multiplication is bilinear, meaning that x(y + z) =
many formulas we could write down that would be
                                                                    xy +xz for every x, y, and z, and x(ay) = a(xy)
“basically the same” as the earlier one. Why choose the
                                                                    whenever a is a real number, and similarly for
above one, rather than, say, replacing q ∗ t by tq∗ ?
                                                                    multiplication on the right.
  It turns out that the formula suggested above leads
                                                              (iii) For any x and y, xy = x y (and therefore
to zero divisors. For example, (j, i)(l, k) works out to be
                                                                    there are no zero divisors).
(0, 0). However, the modified formula
                                                              A normed division algebra is a vector space Rn together
           (q, r )(s, t) = (qs − tr ∗ , q∗ t + sr ),
                                                              with a norm and a method of multiplying vectors that
which one can discover fairly quickly if one bears in         satisfy the above properties. So normed division alge-
mind that one would like (q, r )(q∗ , −r ) to work out        bras exist only in dimensions 1, 2, 4, and 8. Further-
as (|q|2 + |r |2 , 0), does produce a useful number sys-      more, even in these dimensions, R, C, H, and O are the
tem. It is denoted O and its elements are called the          only examples.
octonions (or some times the Cayley numbers). Unfor-              There are various ways to prove this fact, which is
tunately, multiplication of octonions is not even asso-       known as Hurwitz’s theorem. Here is a very brief sketch
cia tive, but it does have two very good properties:           of one of them. The idea is to prove that if a normed
every nonzero octonion has a multiplicative inverse,          division algebra A contains one of the above examples,
and two nonzero octonions never multiply together to          then either it is that example, or it contains the next one
give zero. (Because octonion multiplication is not asso-      in the sequence. So either A is one of R, C, H, and O or
cia tive, these two properties are no longer obviously         A contains the algebra produced by doing to O the pro-
equivalent. However, any subalgebra of the octonions          cess we used to construct H from C and O from H, a pro-
generated by two elements is associative, and this is         cess known as the Cayley–Dickson construction. How-
enough to prove the equivalence.)                             ever, if one applies the Cayley–Dickson construction to
   So now we have number systems when n = 1, 2, 4, or         O, one obtains an algebra with zero divisors.
8. It turns out that these are the only dimensions with          To see how such an argument might work, let us
good notions of multiplication. Of course, “good” has         imagine, for the sake of example, that A contains O
a technical meaning here: matrix multiplication, which        as a proper subalgebra. It turns out that the norm on
is associative but gives zero divisors, is for many pur-      A must be a euclidean norm [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis)—that is, a norm
poses “better” than octonion multiplication, which has        derived from an inner product. (Roughly speaking, this
no zero divisors but is not associative. So let us finish      is because multiplication by an element of norm 1 does
by seeing more precisely what it is that is special about     not change the norm, which gives A so many symme-
dimensions 1, 2, 4, and 8.                                    tries that the norm on A has to be the most symmetric