# Quaternions, Octonions, and Normed            IV.25   Probabilistic Models of Critical Phenomena

IV.25. Probabilistic Models of Critical Phenomena a large critical Galton–Watson tree does not depend onthe offspring distribution. This is another example of universality.This result and variants of it provide a lot of useful information about the asymptotic behavior of large trees. Many interesting functions of the tree can berewritten in terms of the contour function and by Aldous’s theorem they will converge to similar func-tions of the Brownian excursion, whose distribution can be computed explicitly with the help of stochastic cal-culus. To give just one example, this technique can be used to calculate the limiting distribution of the heightof the treeθn. Let the variance of the offspring distribution betree to be its original height multiplied byσ, and let us define the rescaled height$σ /2 \sqrt{n}$. Theof a probability that this is at leastasn gets large, to the quantityx turns out to converge,$2$ k\infty=^1(4 x^2 k^2 - 1) \exp (-2 k^2 x^2). \text{Acknowledgments}.\text{for his help with the simulations and to Gordon Slade for The author is indebted to Gilles Stoltz his remarks on the first version of this article}. \text{Further Reading Aldous}, D. 1993. \text{The continuum random tree}. III.Probability 21:248–89. \text{Annals of Bachelier}, L. 1900. Thé\text{orie de la sp}éculation.\text{tifiques de} l’É\text{cole Normale Sup}érieure (3) 17:21–86.\text{Annales Scien Billingsley}, P. 1968.\text{New York}: \text{John Wiley}.\text{Convergence of Probability Measures}. Durrett, R. 1984.sis. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.\text{Brownian Motion and Martingales in Analy Einstein}, A. 1956.\text{ian Movement}. \text{New York}: Dover.\text{Investigations} \text{on the Theory of the Brown Revuz}, D., and M. Yor. 1991.\text{Brownian Motion}. \text{New York}: Springer.\text{Continuous Martingales and Stroock}, D. W., and S. R. S. Varadhan. 1979.\text{Diffusion Processes}. \text{New York}: Springer.\text{multi dimensional Wiener}, N. 1923. \text{Differential space}.\text{Physics Massachusetts Institute of Technology Journal of Mathematical}2:131–74. IV.25 \text{Probabilistic Models of Critical Phenomena Gordon Slade} 1 \text{Critical Phenomena} 1.1 Examples A \text{population can explode if its birth rate exceeds its death rate}, \text{but otherwise it becomes extinct}. The 657 \text{nature of the population}’s \text{evolution depends critically on which way the balance tips between adding new members and losing old ones}.A \text{porous rock with randomly arranged microscopic pores has water spilled on top}. \text{If there are few pores}, \text{the water will not percolate through the rock}, \text{but if there are many pores}, \text{it will}. Surprisingly, \text{there is a critical degree of porosity that exactly separates these behaviors}. \text{If the rock}’s \text{porosity is below the critical value}, \text{then water cannot flow completely through therock}, \text{but if its porosity exceeds the critical value}, \text{even slightly}, \text{then water will percolate all the way through}.A \text{block of iron placed in a magnetic field will become magnetized}. \text{If the magnetic field is extinguished}, \text{thenthe iron will remain magnetized if the temperature is below the Curie temperature} 770◦C (1418◦F), but not if the temperature is above this critical value. It is strik-ing that there is a specific temperature above which the magnetization of the iron does not merely remain small, but actually vanishes. enatem change abruptly as a relevant parameter (fertility, The above are three examples of. In each example, global properties of the sys-critical ph en om degree of porosity, or temperature) is varied througha critical value. For parameter values just below the critical value, the overall organization of the system isquite different from how it is for values just above. The sharpness of the transition is remarkable. How does it occur so suddenly?

1.2 Theory

The mathematical theory of critical phenomena is cur-rently under going intense development. Intertwined with the science of phase transitions, it draws on ideas from probability theory and statistical physics. Thetheory is inherently probabilistic: each possible configuration of the system (e.g., a particular arrangement ofpores in a rock, or of the magnetic states of the individual atoms in a block of iron) is assigned a probability, and the typical behavior of this ensemble of random configurations is analyzed as a function of parameters of the system (e.g., porosity or temperature). large degree by a profound insight from physics knownas The theory of critical phenomena is now guided to a universality, which, at present, is more of a philosophy than a mathematical theorem. The notion of universality refers to the fact that many essential fea - tures of the transition at a critical point depend on relatively few attributes of the system under consid - eration. In particular, simple mathematical models can
