# Representations

III.78.   Ricci Flow                                                                                              279

of all, namely Euclidean.) Let us call an element of A       lie groups [III.48 §1](/part-03/lie-theory). Since Lie groups have a differ-
imaginary if it is orthogonal to the element 1. Then         entiable structure, the representations of interest are
we can define a conjugation operation on A by tak-            those where the homomorphism g → Tg reflects this
ing 1∗ to be 1 and x ∗ to be −x when x is imaginary,         structure (for example, by being differentiable).
and extending linearly. This operation can be shown            Representations are discussed in much greater detail
to have all the properties one would like. In particular,    in representation theory [IV.9](/part-04/representation-theory). See also operator
aa∗ = a∗ a = a2 for every element a of A. Let us           algebras [IV.15 §2](/part-04/operator-algebras).
choose a norm-1 element of A that is orthogonal to all
of O and call it i. Then i∗ = −i, so 1 = i∗ i = −i2 , so     III.78 Ricci Flow
i2 = −1. Now take the algebra generated by i and the                  Terence Tao
copy of O that lies in A. With some algebraic manip-
ulation, one can demonstrate that this consists of ele-      Ricci flow is a technique that allows one to take an arbi-
ments of the form x + iy, with x and y belonging to O.       trary riemannian manifold [I.3 §6.10](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) and smooth
More over, the product of x + iy and z + iw turns out         out the geometry of that manifold to make it look more
to be xz − wy ∗ + i(x ∗ w + zy), which is exactly what       symmetric. It has proven to be a very useful tool in
the Cayley–Dickson construction gives.                       understanding the topology of such manifolds.
   For further details about quaternions and octonions,         Ricci flow can be defined for Riemannian manifolds
two excellent sources are a discussion by John Baez          of any dimension, but for the sake of exposition we
at http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/octonions and a             restrict ourselves here to two-dimensional manifolds
book, On Quaternions and Octonions: Their Geometry,          (i.e., surfaces) as they are easy to visualize. From our
Arithmetic, and Symmetry, by J. H. Conway and D. A.          everyday experience with three-dimensional space R3 ,
Smith (2003; Wellesley, MA: AK Peters).                      we are familiar with many surfaces, such as spheres,
                                                             cylinders, planes, tori (the shape of the surface of a
III.77     Representations                                   doughnut), and so forth. This is an extrinsic way to
                                                             think about surfaces: as subsets of a larger ambient
A linear representation of a finite group [I.3 §2.1](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) G is     space, which in this case is three-dimensional Euclid-
a way of associating a linear map Tg , from some vec-        ean space. On the other hand, one can think about
tor space [I.3 §2.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) V to itself, with each element g of     surfaces in a more abstract intrinsic manner: by con-
G. Of course, this association must reflect the group         side ring how the points in the surface stand in rela-
structure of G, so Tg Th should equal Tgh , and if e is      tion to each other, but not in relation to any exter-
the identity of G, then Te should be the identity map        nal space. (For instance, the Klein bottle makes perfect
on V .                                                       sense as a surface from an intrinsic viewpoint, but can-
   One useful aspect of linear representations is that       not be viewed extrinsically in three-dimensional Euclid-
the dimension of the vector space V may be consider-         ean space R3 , although it can be viewed extrinsically
ably smaller than the size of G. If this is the case, then   in four-dimensional Euclidean space R4 .) It turns out
the representation packages the information about G          that the two viewpoints are mostly equivalent to each
in a particularly efficient way. For example, the alter-       other, but it will be more convenient here to adopt the
nating group [III.68](/part-03/permutation-groups) A5 , which has sixty elements, is      intrinsic perspective.
isomorphic to the group of rotational symmetries of             A good example of a surface is the surface of Earth.
an icosahedron, and can therefore be thought of as           Extrinsically, this is a subset of a three-dimensional
a group of transformations of R3 (or, equivalently, of       space R3 . But we can also view this surface two dimen-
3 . imes 3 matrices).                                             sion ally by using an atlas: a collection of maps or charts
   A more fundamental reason for representations be-         that describe various regions of this surface by identi-
ing useful is that every representation can be decom-        fying them with a subset of a two-dimensional plane.
posed into building blocks known as irreducible repre-       As long as we have enough charts to cover the origi-
sentations. It turns out that a great deal of information    nal surface, this atlas is sufficient to describe the sur-
about G can be deduced from a few basic facts about          face. This way of thinking of a surface is not completely
its irreducible representations.                             intrinsic, because there is more than one atlas that one
   These ideas can be generalized to infinite groups          could associate with this surface, and they may differ in
as well, and are particularly important in the case of       various minor ways. For instance, in one atlas the city