# Ricci Flow

III.78.   Ricci Flow

of all, namely Euclidean.) Let us call an element of A
imaginary if it is orthogonal to the element 1. Then
we can define a conjugation operation on A by tak-
ing 1∗ to be 1 and x ∗ to be −x when x is imaginary,
and extending linearly. This operation can be shown
to have all the properties one would like. In particular,    in representation theory [IV.9](/part-04/representation-theory). See also operator
aa∗ = a∗ a = a2 for every element a of A. Let us
choose a norm-1 element of A that is orthogonal to all
of O and call it i. Then i∗ = −i, so 1 = i∗ i = −i2 , so     III.78 Ricci Flow
i2 = −1. Now take the algebra generated by i and the
copy of O that lies in A. With some algebraic manip-
ulation, one can demonstrate that this consists of ele-
ments of the form x + iy, with x and y belonging to O.
More over, the product of x + iy and z + iw turns out
to be xz − wy ∗ + i(x ∗ w + zy), which is exactly what
the Cayley–Dickson construction gives.
   For further details about quaternions and octonions,
two excellent sources are a discussion by John Baez
at http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/octonions and a
book, On Quaternions and Octonions: Their Geometry,
Arithmetic, and Symmetry, by J. H. Conway and D. A.
Smith (2003; Wellesley, MA: AK Peters).
III.77     Representations
A linear representation of a finite group [I.3 §2.1](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) G is     space, which in this case is three-dimensional Euclid-
a way of associating a linear map Tg , from some vec-
tor space [I.3 §2.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) V to itself, with each element g of     surfaces in a more abstract intrinsic manner: by con-
G. Of course, this association must reflect the group
structure of G, so Tg Th should equal Tgh , and if e is
the identity of G, then Te should be the identity map
on V .
   One useful aspect of linear representations is that
the dimension of the vector space V may be consider-
ably smaller than the size of G. If this is the case, then   in four-dimensional Euclidean space R4 .) It turns out
the representation packages the information about G
in a particularly efficient way. For example, the alter-
nating group [III.68](/part-03/permutation-groups) A5 , which has sixty elements, is
isomorphic to the group of rotational symmetries of
an icosahedron, and can therefore be thought of as
a group of transformations of R3 (or, equivalently, of
3 . imes 3 matrices).
   A more fundamental reason for representations be-
ing useful is that every representation can be decom-
posed into building blocks known as irreducible repre-
sentations. It turns out that a great deal of information    nal surface, this atlas is sufficient to describe the sur-
about G can be deduced from a few basic facts about
its irreducible representations.
   These ideas can be generalized to infinite groups
as well, and are particularly important in the case of

279
lie groups [III.48 §1](/part-03/lie-theory). Since Lie groups have a differ-
entiable structure, the representations of interest are
those where the homomorphism g → Tg reflects this
structure (for example, by being differentiable).
Representations are discussed in much greater detail
algebras [IV.15 §2](/part-04/operator-algebras).
Terence Tao
Ricci flow is a technique that allows one to take an arbi-
trary riemannian manifold [I.3 §6.10](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) and smooth
out the geometry of that manifold to make it look more
symmetric. It has proven to be a very useful tool in
understanding the topology of such manifolds.
Ricci flow can be defined for Riemannian manifolds
of any dimension, but for the sake of exposition we
restrict ourselves here to two-dimensional manifolds
(i.e., surfaces) as they are easy to visualize. From our
everyday experience with three-dimensional space R3 ,
we are familiar with many surfaces, such as spheres,
cylinders, planes, tori (the shape of the surface of a
doughnut), and so forth. This is an extrinsic way to
think about surfaces: as subsets of a larger ambient
ean space. On the other hand, one can think about
side ring how the points in the surface stand in rela-
tion to each other, but not in relation to any exter-
nal space. (For instance, the Klein bottle makes perfect
sense as a surface from an intrinsic viewpoint, but can-
not be viewed extrinsically in three-dimensional Euclid-
ean space R3 , although it can be viewed extrinsically
that the two viewpoints are mostly equivalent to each
other, but it will be more convenient here to adopt the
intrinsic perspective.
A good example of a surface is the surface of Earth.
Extrinsically, this is a subset of a three-dimensional
space R3 . But we can also view this surface two dimen-
sion ally by using an atlas: a collection of maps or charts
that describe various regions of this surface by identi-
fying them with a subset of a two-dimensional plane.
As long as we have enough charts to cover the origi-
face. This way of thinking of a surface is not completely
intrinsic, because there is more than one atlas that one
could associate with this surface, and they may differ in
various minor ways. For instance, in one atlas the city

$280$

of Los Angeles might be on the boundary of one of the charts, where as in another atlas it might be in the interior of every chart that it appears in. However, there are many facts one can deduce from an atlas that do not depend on the choice of atlas; for instance, using any accurate atlas of Earth one can see that it is impossible to travel from Los Angeles to Sydney with out crossing at least one ocean. If a fact regarding a surface does not depend on which atlas one uses, we say that it is intrinsic or coordinate-independent.
It will turn out that Ricci flow is an intrinsic flow on surfaces; it can be defined with out any knowledge of charts or of some external space. We have informally described the mathematical concept of a surface, or two-dimensional manifold. But to describe Ricci flow we need the more sophisticated concept of a Riemannian surface (or two-dimensional Riemannian manifold). This is a surface M with an additional (intrinsic) object, a Riemannian metric g, which specifies the distance d (x , y) between any two points x, y on the surface.
This metric allows one to define the angle ∠ $γ^{1}$ , $γ^{2}$ that any two curves $γ^{1}$ , $γ^{2}$ on the surface make where they intersect; for instance, the Earth’s equator intersects any longitude at right angles. And it can also be used to define the area |$A$| of any given set A on the surface (e . g . , the area of Australia) . There are a number of properties that these concepts of distance, angle, and area have to satisfy, but the most important property can be stated informally as follows:
the geometry of a Riemannian surface has to be very close to the geometry of the Euclidean plane at small length scales. To give an example of what the above statement means, take any point x in the surface M, and pick any positive radius r . Because the Riemannian metric g specifies a notion of distance, we can define the disk B (x , r) of radius r centered at x to be the set of all points y whose distance d (x , y) to x is less than r . Because the Riemannian metric g defines a notion of area, we can then discuss the area of this disk B (x , r).
In the Euclidean plane, this area would of course be $\pir^{2}$ . In a Riemannian surface, this need not be the case: for instance, the total area of the surface of Earth (and hence of all disks within this surface) is finite, even though $\pir^{2}$ can be arbitrarily large as r goes to infinity. However, we do require that, when r is very small, the area of the disk B (x , r) becomes increasingly close to $\pir^{2}$ ; more precisely, we require that the ratio between the area and $\pir^{2}$ converges to $1$ in the limit as r tends to $0$ .

III. Mathematical Concepts

This brings us to the notion of scalar curvature R (x). In some cases, such as on the sphere, the area | B (x , r) | of a small disk B (x , r) is actually a little bit smaller than $\pir^{2}$ ; when this is the case, we say that the surface has positive scalar curvature at x. In some other cases, such as on a saddle, the area | B (x , r) | of a small disk B (x , r) is a bit larger than $\pir^{2}$ ; then we say that the surface has negative scalar curvature at x.
In other cases again, such as on a cylinder, the area | B (x , r) | of a small disk B (x , r) is equal (or very nearly equal) to $\pir^{2}$ ; in this case we say the surface has vanishing scalar curvature at x. (This is despite the cylinder being “curved” when viewed extrinsically as a subset of three dimensional space .) Note that on a complicated surface it is perfectly possible to have positive scalar curvature at some points of the surface and negative or vanishing scalar curvature at other points.
The scalar curvature R (x) at any given point x can be defined more precisely by the formula

$\pir^{2} - |B(x$ , $r)|R(x) =$ lim / $\pir^{4}/24r \to 0$

(For surfaces in an external space, this intrinsic concept of scalar curvature is almost identical to the extrinsic concept of Gauss curvature, which we will not discuss here .) One can refine this notion to that of Ricci curvature Ric (x) (v , v). Consider now an angular sector A (x , r , $\theta,$ v) inside a small disk B (x , r) of small angular aperture $\theta$ (measured in radians) about some direction v (a unit vector) emanating from x. This sector is well-defined, basically because the Riemannian metric gives us the appropriate notions of distance and angle.
In Euclidean space, the area |A(x , $r$ , $\theta,v)|$ of this sec$1$ tor is ${}^{2}\thetar^{2}$ . But on a surface, the area |A(x , $r$ , $\theta,v)|$ may be slightly less (respectively , slightly more) than

$122\thetar$ . In these cases we say that the surface has positive (respectively , negative) Ricci curvature at x in the direction v. More precisely, we have

$1\thetar^{2} - |A(x$ , $r$ , $\theta,v)|$ Ric  (  x )(v , $v) =$ lim li$m^{2}$ .

$\thetar^{4}/24r \to 0\theta \to 0$

Now it turns out that for surfaces, this more complicated notion of curvature is in fact equal to half

$1$

the scalar curvature: Ric (x) (v , v) $= {}^{2}$ R (x) . In particular, the direction v plays no role in Ricci curvature in two dimensions. However, it is possible to extend all of the above concepts to other dimensions. (For instance, to define scalar and Ricci curvature for three dimensional manifolds, one would use balls and solid

III.78.   Ricci Flow

sectors instead of disks and angular sectors, as well as
making other necessary adjustments, such as replacing
the expression π r 2 with 43 π r 3 .) In higher dimensions it   Perelman.
turns out that the Ricci curvature is more complicated
than the scalar curvature. For instance, in three dimen-
sions it is possible for a point x to have positive Ricci
curvature in one direction but negative Ricci curvature
in another; intuitively, this means that narrow sectors
in the former direction “curve inward,” where as narrow
sectors in the latter direction “curve outward.”
   Now we can describe Ricci flow informally as the pro-
cess of stretching the metric g in directions of negative
Ricci curvature, and contracting the metric in directions
of positive Ricci curvature. The stronger the curvature,
the faster the stretching or contracting of the metric.
The concepts of stretching and contracting will not be
defined formally here, but they increase or decrease
the distance between points along these directions. By
changing the notion of distance, one also affects the
notions of angle and volume (though it turns out that
Ricci flow in two dimensions is conformal, which means
that the notion of angle remains unaffected by the
flow; this fact is closely related to the previously men-
tioned fact that in two dimensions the Ricci curvature
is the same in all directions). Ricci flow can be described
succinctly and precisely by the equation
although we will not define here exactly what it means
to differentiate the metric g with respect to the time
variable t, or what it means for that derivative to equal
the Ricci curvature multiplied by −2.
   In principle, one could perform Ricci flow on a mani-
fold for as long a period of time as one wished. In prac-
tice, however, it is possible (especially in the presence
of positive curvature) for the Ricci flow to cause a man-
ifold to develop singularities: points where it ceases
to look like a manifold, and where the geometry may
stop resembling Euclidean geometry even at very small
scales. For example, if one starts with a perfectly round
sphere and performs Ricci flow, what happens is that
the sphere contracts at a steady rate until it becomes
a point, which is no longer a two-dimensional mani-
fold. In three dimensions, more complicated singular-
ities are possible: for instance, one can have a neck
pinch, in which a cylinder-like “neck” of the manifold
shrinks under Ricci flow, until at one or more places
along the neck, the cylinder has tapered down to a
point. The types of possible singularity formations for

281
three-dimensional Ricci flow were only classified com-
pletely in a recent and very important paper of Grigori
Some years ago, Richard Hamilton made the funda-
mental observation that Ricci flow is an excellent tool
for simplifying the structure of a manifold: generally
speaking, it compresses all the positive-curvature parts
of the manifold into nothingness, while expanding the
negative-curvature parts of the manifold until they
become very homogeneous, in the sense that the man-
ifold begins to look much the same no matter which
vantage point one selects inside it. Indeed, the flow
seems to separate the manifold into extremely symmet-
ric components. For instance, in two dimensions the
Ricci flow always ends up endowing the manifold with
a metric of constant curvature, which could be positive
(as in the sphere), zero (as in the cylinder), or negative
(as in hyperbolic space); the fact that such a constant-
curvature metric can always be found is known as
the uniformization theorem [V.34](/part-05/the-uniformization-theorem) and is of funda-
mental importance in the theory of surfaces. In higher
dimensions, the Ricci flow can develop singularities
before perfect symmetry is attained, but it turns out
that it is possible to perform “surgeries” (see differ-
ential topology [IV.7 §§2.3, 2.4]) on the singularities
that develop this way, so that the manifold becomes
d                                        smooth again and one can restart the Ricci flow pro-
g = −2 Ric,
dt                                       cess. (The surgery may, however, change the topology
of the manifold: for instance, it can convert a connected
manifold into two disconnected pieces.) In three dimen-
sions it has recently been shown by Perelman that Ricci
flow, when augmented by surgery to remove the sin-
gularities, does indeed convert an arbitrary manifold
(obeying some mild assumptions) into a finite union of
some very symmetric and explicitly describable pieces;
the precise statement of this conclusion was known as
the geometrization conjecture of Thurston. One con-
sequence of this conjecture, which is now a rigorous
theorem proved by Perelman, is the poincaré con-
jecture [V.25](/part-05/the-poincar-conjecture): any compact three-dimensional man-
ifold that is simply connected (meaning that any closed
loop on the manifold can be contracted smoothly to
a point with out ever leaving the manifold) can in fact
be smoothly deformed into a 3-sphere (which is to
four-dimensional Euclidean space as the usual two-
dimensional sphere is to three-dimensional Euclidean
space). The proof of Poincaré’s conjecture is one of
the most impressive recent achievements of modern
mathematics.