# Spherical Harmonics

III . $87$ .

Spherical Harmonics

Example $1$ continued. We have already seen that not all multiplication operators have eigenvalues. However, they do have an easily described spectrum. Let M u be such an operator and let S be the set of all values u (t) taken by the function u. Let μ = u(t0) be one of these values and consider the operator M u - \mu I. Given any function $f$ in C[0 , 1 ] , the value of(Mu - \mu I)f$at$ t0$is$ u(t0)f(t0) - \mu f(t0) = 0 .
It follows that $M^{u} - \mu I$ is not surjective (for instance, the range of M u  -  \mu I does not contain any nonzero constant function) and therefore \mu belongs to the spectrum of M u . Thus, S is contained in the spectrum of M u ; it is not hard to show that the two are in fact equal. We may easily generalize this example to show that if K is any nonempty compact subset of C , then there is a linear operator T with K as its spectrum.
Let X be the space of continuous complex-valued functions defined on K, for each z $\in$ K, let u (z)  =  z, and let T be the multiplication operator M u , defined as it was when K was the set [0 , 1 ] . The spectrum is central to most aspects of operator theory. We shall briefly mention a result about Hilbert space operators, known as the spectral theorem (there are a number of variations). Let H be a Hilbert space with inner product x, y . A continuous linear operator T on H is called Hermitian if T x, $y = x$, T y for every $x$ and $y$ in H. Examples $4$ .
(i) If H is finite dimensional, then a linear operator S on H is Hermitian if and only if, with respect to some (and hence every) orthonormal basis [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis), S is represented by a Hermitian matrix (i . e . , a matrix A with $A = A$̄ T). (ii) On the Hilbert space $L^{2}$ [0 , 1] , let M u be the operator of multiplication by a continuous function u (just as in example $1$ , but now we apply M u to functions in $L^{2}$ [0 , 1 ] rather than just $C[0 , 1 ] )$. Then $M^{u}$ is Hermitian if and only if u is real-valued.
If H is finite dimensional and T is a Hermitian operator on H, then H has an orthonormal basis consisting of eigenvectors of T (a “diagonal basis ”). k Equivalently, $T = j = {}^{1}\lambda^{j}P^{j}$ , where ${\lambda^{1}}$ , . . . , $\lambda^{k}$ are the distinct eigenvalues of T and P j is the orthogonal projection of H onto the eigenspace E j ≡ {x $\in$ H : $Tx = \lambda^{j}$ x}. If H is infinite dimensional and T is a Hermitian operator on H, then it is not generally true that H has $a_{295}$ basis of eigenvectors.
But, very importantly, the representation $T = \lambda^{j}P^{j}$ does generalize to a representation T $= \lambda$ d P , a kind of integral with respect to a “projection-valued measure” on the spectrum of T . There is an intermediate case, for so-called compact Hermitian operators, “compactness” being a kind of strong continuity, of great importance in applications. The technicalities are much simpler than in the general case, involving an infinite sum, rather than an integral. A very readable introduction may be found in Young (1988). Further Reading Young, N. 1988 .
An Introduction to Hilbert Space. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. III . $87$ Spherical Harmonics The starting point for fourier analysis [III.27](/part-03/the-fourier-transform) is the observation that a wide class of periodic functions $f(\theta)$ with period $2\pi$ can be decomposed as infinite linear combinations of the trigonometric functions [III.92](/part-03/trigonometric-functions) sin $n\theta$ and cos $n\theta,$ or, equivalently, as sums of

$\infty$

the form $n = - \infty\text{a}^{n}ein\theta$ . A useful way to think of a periodic function f defined on the real line is as an equivalent function F defined on T , the unit circle in the complex plane. A typical point on the circle has the form e $i\theta$ , and we define F (e $i\theta$ ) to be $f(\theta)$ . (Note that if we add $2\pi$ to $\theta$ then $F(ei\theta)$ does not change because $ei\theta = e^{i}(\theta + {}^{2}\pi)$ and $f(\theta)$ does not change because f is periodic with period $2\pi$ .)

$\infty\text{in}\theta$ and we write $z$ for $ei\theta$ , If  f(. heta) =n = - . nfty ane. nfty

n

then $F(z) =n = - \infty\text{a}^{n}z$ . Therefore, if we consider functions defined on T rather than periodic functions defined on R , then Fourier analysis decomposes our functions into infinite linear combinations of the functions z n , where n can be any integer. What is special about the functions z n ? The answer is that they are the characters of T , which means that they are the only nonzero continuous complex-valued functions defined on T that satisfy the relation φ (zw)  =  φ (z) φ (w) for every $z$ and $w$ in T .
Now imagine that F is a function defined not on T but on the two-dimensional set $S^{2}$ , which is the unit sphere in $R^{3}$ (defined as the set of points (x , y, z) such that $x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2} = 1)$ . More generally, how about functions F defined on S d $- {}^{1}$ (defined as the set of points $(x^{1}$ , . . . , $x^{d})$ such that (x1)2 + · · · + (xd)2 = 1) ? Is there a natural way of decomposing such an F , at least

$296$

if it is sufficiently nice? That is, is there a good way of generalizing Fourier analysis to higher-dimensional spheres? There is an important and initially discouraging difference between the sphere $S^{2}$ and the circle $S^{1} = T$ . We defined T as a set of complex numbers rather than as a set of points in the plane $R^{2}$ because that way it forms a multiplicative group.
The sphere, by contrast, does not have a useful group structure (for a clue about why, see quaternions, octonions, and normed division algebras [III.76](/part-03/quaternions-octonions-and-normed-iv25-probabilistic-models-of-critical-phenomena)), so we cannot talk about characters. This makes it less obvious what the “nice” functions should be, into which we might hope to decompose more general functions. However, there is another way of explaining why the trigonometric functions arise naturally, one that does not involve complex numbers.
We can write a typical point in $S^{1}$ as (x ,  y) with $x^{2} + y^{2} = 1$ , or equivalently as (cos $\theta,$ sin $\theta)$ for some real number $\theta.$ Then our basic functions, if we wish to avoid complex numbers, are cos $n\theta$ and sin $n\theta,$ but these can also be written in terms of $x$ and $y$. For instance, cos $\theta$ and sin $\theta$ are $x$ and $y$, respectively, cos $2\theta =$ cos ${}^{2}\theta -$ sin ${}^{2}\theta = x^{2} - y^{2}$ , and so on.
(Note that $x^{2} - y^{2} = 2x^{2} - 1 = 1 - 2y^{2}$ , since $x^{2} + y^{2} = 1$ .) In general, cos $n\theta$ and sin $n\theta$ can always be written as polynomials in cos $\theta$ and sin $\theta,$ so the basic trigonometric functions can be thought of as restrictions to the unit circle of certain polynomials. What are these polynomials? It turns out that they are harmonic and homogeneous. A harmonic polynomial p (x , y) is one that satisfies the laplace equation [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). elta p = 0 , where$.
elta p$\text{stands for} \partial${}2 p$\partial${}2 p$+ .$2$\partial$ y_{2}$\partial x \text{For instance}, if p(x ,$ y) = x2 - y2$, then \partial${}2 p/$\partial$ x2 = 2$and \partial${}2 p/$\partial$ y2 = - 2 , so $x^{2} - y^{2}$ is, as we would hope, a harmonic polynomial. Since the Laplacian $\Delta$ is a linear operator, the harmonic polynomials form a vector space. A homogeneous polynomial of degree n is one in which the total degree of each term is n, or equivalently a polynomial p (x , y) such that p ( $\lambda$ x , $\lambda$ y) is always equal to $\lambda^{n}p(x$ ,  y).
For example, $x^{3} - 3xy^{2}$ is homogeneous of degree $3$ (and also harmonic).
The homogeneous harmonic polynomials of degree n form a subspace of the space of all harmonic polynomials. It has dimension $1$ when $n = 0$ and $2$ when $n > 0$ . (When $n > 0$ it corresponds to the space of functions of the form $A$ cos $n\theta + B$ sin $n\theta.$ The polynomial $x^{3} - 3xy^{2}$ , for instance, corresponds to the function cos $3\theta$ .) III. Mathematical Concepts The notion of a harmonic polynomial generalizes very easily to higher dimensions.
For example, in three dimensions a harmonic polynomial is a polynomial p (x , y, z) such that ∂ ${}^{2}p$ ∂ ${}^{2}p$ ∂ ${}^{2}p + += 0$ . $22$ ∂$z_{2}$ ∂x ∂y A spherical harmonic of order n and dimension d is the restriction to the sphere $S^{d} - {}^{1}$ of $a$ harmonic polynomial in d variables that is homogeneous of degree n. Here are some of the properties of spherical harmonics that make them particularly useful and closely analogous to the trigonometric polynomials on the circle.
We shall fix a dimension d and use the notation d\mu to denote Haar measure on the unit sphere $S = S^{d} - {}^{1}$ . Basically, this means that if f is an integrable function from S to R , then S f (x) d\mu is its average. (i) Orthogonality. If $p$ and $q$ are spherical harmonics of dimension d, and if they have different degrees, then S p (x) q (x) dμ $= 0$ . (ii) Completeness. Every function f :
S $\to$ R that belongs to $L^{2}(S$ , $\mu$ ) (meaning that $S|f(x)|^{2}d\mu$ exists $\infty$ and is finite) can be written as a sum n $= {}^{0}$ H n (with convergence in $L^{2}$ (S , μ)), where H n is a spherical harmonic of order n. (iii) Finite-dimensionality of decomposition. For each $d$ and $n$, the vector space of spherical harmonics of dimension d and order n is finite dimensional. From these three properties it is easy to deduce that $L^{2}$ (S , μ) has an orthonormal basis [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis) consisting of spherical harmonics.
Why are spherical harmonics natural, and why are they useful? Both questions can be given several answers: here is one for each. The Laplace operator $\Delta,$ which operates on functions defined on R n , can be generalized to functions defined on any riemannian manifold [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) M. The generalization, denoted $\Delta$ M , is called the Laplace-Beltrami operator for M, and its behavior gives one a great deal of information about the geometry of M.
In particular, the Laplace-Beltrami operator can be defined for the sphere S d $- {}^{1}$ , where it is called simply the Beltrami operator. It turns out that the spherical harmonics are the eigenvectors [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) of the Beltrami operator. More precisely, a spherical harmonic of dimension d and order n is an eigenvector with eigenvalue $- n(n + d - 2)$ . (Notice that the second derivative of cos $n\theta$ is $- n^{2}$ cos $n\theta,$ which corresponds to the case d $= 2 .) This gives an alternative, more natural (but less