# The Peano Axioms

$258$

[I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). For instance, if the group consists of all translations by an integer vector, then two points (x , y) and (z , w) are equivalent if and only if z - $x$ and $w$ - y are both integers, and the quotient space is a torus. However, if you take instead the group of all rotations about the origin through a multiple of $\pi/3$ , then every point apart from the origin is equivalent to exactly five others, while the origin is equivalent only to itself.
The result in this case is not a manifold, because the exceptional behavior at the origin results in a singularity. However, it is a well-understood kind of singularity. An orbifold is, roughly speaking, just like a manifold, except that whereas manifolds are locally like R n , orbifolds are locally like quotients of R n by groups of symmetries, and can therefore have a few singularities. See algebraic geometry [IV.4](/part-04/algebra) and also mirror symmetry [IV.16](/part-04/mirror-symmetry). III .
$66$ Ordinals Loosely speaking, the ordinals are what we get if, starting with $0$ , we use the following two procedures. We can add $1$ to whatever we have, and we can “collect together” (or “take the limit of ”) whatever we have so far. So from $0$ we would get $1$ , then $2$ , then $3$ , and so on. After all of those, we could take their “limit” (i . e . , the limit of $0$ , $1$ , $2$ , $3$ , . . .), which is called ω. Then we can add $1$ , obtaining $ω + 1$ , then $ω + 2$ , and so on. And then we can take the limit of all of those, to obtain an ordinal we could write as ω + ω. And so on.
Note that this final “and so on” carries quite a lot inside it. For example, the ordinals do not just consist of finite sums of ωs and natural numbers, since we can take the limit of $ω,ω + ω,ω + ω + ω,$ . . . , which we might call $ω^{2}$ . Ordinals arise in two ways (which turn out to be closely related). First, they give a measure of the “size” of a well-ordering. A well-ordering on a set is an ordering in which every (nonempty) subset has a least element. For example, the set ${\frac{1}{2}}$ , $\frac{2}{3}$ , $\frac{3}{4}$ , . . . } ∪ ${\frac{3}{2}}$ , $\frac{5}{3}$ , $\frac{7}{4}$ , . . .
 } in the reals is well-ordered, while the set {. . . , $\frac{1}{4}$ , $\frac{1}{3}$ , $\frac{1}{2}$ is not. The first set is order isomorphic to the ordinals less than ω + ω, meaning that there is a bijection that preserves the order. So one says that that set has order type $ω + ω.$ Ordinals also commonly arise when one wishes to index transfinite processes. Here “transfinite” means “going beyond finite.” As an example, suppose that we wish to “count, in increasing order” the elements of the well-ordered set above. How would we do it?
We would $123$ start wit$h^{2}$ , the$n^{3}$ , the$n^{4}$ , and so on. But, at the end of III. Mathematical Concepts all time, we would still not have reached elements like $35{}^{2}$ o$r^{3}$ . So we would start again: “at time ω” we would $35$ coun$t^{2}$ , then at time $ω + 1$ we would coun$t^{3}$ , and so on. Thus our counting is complete by time ω + ω. For a more detailed explanation of ordinals, including more examples and more on how they arise in mathematics, see set theory [IV.22](/part-04/set-theory). III . $67$

The Peano Axioms

Everyone knows what the natural numbers are: $0$ , $1$ , $2$ , $3$ , and so on. But how would we make that “and so on” precise? Can we look at the way that we reason about natural numbers and isolate a few basic principles, or axioms, whose consequences do complete justice to our intuitive picture of what the natural numbers should be? To put it another way, when we are proving something about the natural numbers, what assumptions do we need in order to get started? To answer this question, let us strip things down to the bare minimum:
we have an object called $0$ , and an operation s, called the successor function, which we think of intuitively as “adding $1$ . ” In this pareddown language, we would like to say two things: that all the numbers $0$ , s ( $0$ ), s (s ( $0$ )), . . . are distinct natural numbers, and that there are no others. One simple way is to use the following two axioms. The first says that $0$ is not a successor:  (  i  )  For all $x,s(x) \neq 0$ . The second says that distinct elements stay distinct when you take their successors: (ii) For all $x$ and $y$, if x $\neq$ y, then s (x) $\neq$ s (y).
Note that this implies, for example, that s (s (s ( $0 ))) \neq$ s ( $0$ ), for if they were equal, then, from rule (ii), we could deduce that $s(s(0)) = 0$ , contradicting rule  (  i  ). Now, how can we say that there are no other natural numbers? One would like to say that, for every x, either $x = 0$ or $x = s(0)$ or $x = s(s(0))$ or · · · , but that is an infinitely long statement, and those are definitely not allowed. After the failure of that very natural attempt, one might guess that there is no way to achieve the goal, but in fact there is a brilliant solution: induction.
Here is an axiom that expresses the principle of induction. (iii) Let A be any subset of the natural numbers with the following properties: $0 \in A,$ and $s(x) \in A$ whenever x $\in$ A. Then A must be the set of all natural numbers.