# The Spectrum

$294$

III . $86$ The Spectrum

G. R. Allan

In the theory of linear maps [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), or operators, on a vector space [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), the notions of eigenvalue and eigenvector [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) play an important role. Recall that if V is a vector space (over R or C) and if T : V $\to$ V is a linear mapping, then an eigenvector of T is a nonzero vector e in V such that T (e) $= \lambda e$ for some scalar $\lambda;$ then $\lambda$ is the eigenvalue corresponding to the eigenvector e.
If V is finite dimensional, then the eigenvalues are also the roots of the characteristic polynomial χ (t) = det (t I - T) of T . Because every nonconstant complex polynomial has a root (the so-called fundamental theorem of algebra [V.13](/part-05/the-fundamental-theorem-of-algebra)), it follows that every linear operator on a finite-dimensional, complex vector space has at least one eigenvalue. If the scalar field is R , then not all operators have eigenvectors (e . g . , consider a rotation about the origin in $R^{2}$ ) .
The linear operators that arise in analysis usually act on infinite-dimensional spaces (see [III.50](/part-03/linear-operators-and-their-properties)). We consider continuous linear operators acting on a complex banach space [III.62](/part-03/normed-spaces-and-banach-spaces); these will be referred to simply as operators (even though not all linear operators on an infinite-dimensional Banach space are continuous). We shall now see that, for X infinite dimensional, not every such operator has an eigenvalue. Example $1$ .
Let X be the Banach space  C[0 , 1 ] , consisting of all continuous, complex-valued functions on the closed interval [0 , 1 ] of the real line. The vector-space structure is the “natural” one (e . g . , for f , g $\in$ X the sum $f + g$ is defined by setting $(f + g)(t) = f(t) + g(t)$ for each t and the norm is the supremum norm, that is, the largest value of any |f(t)|) . Now let u be a continuous complex-valued function on [0 , 1] . We can associate with it a multiplication operator M u on C [0 , 1] as follows. Given a function f , let M u (f) be the function that takes t to u (t) f (t).
It is clear that M u is linear and continuous. We shall see that whether M u has an eigenvalue depends on the choice of u. We consider two simple cases. (i) Let u be the constant function u (t) ≡ k. Then evidently M u has the single eigenvalue k and every (nonzero) function f in X is an eigenvector. (ii) Let u (t) = t for all t. Suppose that the complex number $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue of M u . Then there is some $f \in C$ [0 , 1 ] , not identically zero, such that $u(t)f(t) = \lambda f(t)$ and so $(t - \lambda)f(t) = 0$ for all

III. Mathematical Concepts

t. But then $f(t) = 0$ for all $t= \lambda,$ so that, since f is continuous, f (t) ≡ $0$ , contrary to hypothesis. So, for this choice of u, the operator M u has no eigenvalue. Let X be a complex Banach space and let T be an operator on X. Then T is said to be invertible if and only if there is some operator S on X for which $ST = TS = I$ (here , ST is the composition of S and T , and I is the identity operator on X). It can be shown that T is invertible if and only if T is both injective (i . e . , T (x) $= 0$ only for x $= 0$ ) and surjective (i . e . , T (X)  =  X).
The part here that is not just simple algebra is to show that if T is both injective and surjective, then the linear inverse $T - 1$ is $a$ continuous operator. A complex number $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue of T precisely if $T - \lambda I$ is not injective. If V is a finite-dimensional space, then an injective operator T : V $\to$ V is necessarily also surjective, and hence invertible. For X infinite dimensional this implication is no longer valid. Example $2$ .
Let H be the hilbert space [III.37](/part-03/bayesian-analysis){}2 that consists of all sequences (ξ n) n $\ge {}^{1}$ of complex numbers such that $n \ge {}^{1}|ξ^{n}|^{2} < \infty.$ Let $S$ be the “right-shift” operator defined by S $(ξ^{1}$ , $ξ^{2}$ , $ξ^{3}$ , . . . $) = (0$ , $ξ^{1}$ , $ξ^{2}$ , . . .). Then S is injective but not surjective. The “reverse shift” S ∗ , defined by S ∗ ( $ξ^{1}$ , $ξ^{2}$ , $ξ^{3}$ , . . . $) = (ξ^{2}$ , $ξ^{3}$ , . . .), is surjective but not injective. With this example in mind, we make the following definition. Definition $3$ .
Let X be a complex Banach space and let T be an operator on X. The spectrum of T , denoted by Sp T (or σ (T)), is the set of all complex numbers $\lambda$ such that $T - \lambda I$ is not invertible. The following remarks should be clear. (i) If X is finite dimensional, then Sp T is just the set of eigenvalues of T . (ii) For general X, Sp T includes the set of eigenvalues of T , but may be larger (e . g . , in example $2$ , $0$ is not an eigenvalue of S, but $0$ does belong to the spectrum of S). It is easy to show that the spectrum is always a bounded and closed (i . e .
, compact [III.9](/part-03/compactness-and-compactication)) subset of C . A rather deeper fact is that it is never empty: that is, there will always be some $\lambda$ for which $T - \lambda I$ is not invertible. That is proved by applying liouville’s theorem [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions) to the analytic operator-valued function $\lambda\to (\lambda I - T) - 1$ , defined for $\lambda$ not in the spectrum of T .