# The Mandelbrot Set

$244$

Ullrich, P. 1998 . The genes is of Hensel’s p-adic numbers. In Charlemagne and His Heritage. 1200 Years of Civilization and Science in Europe, volume $2$ , $pp. 163 - 78$ . Turnhout: Brepols. The Logarithmic Function See the exponential and logarithmic functions [III.25](/part-03/the-exponential-and-logarithmic-functions) III . $52$ The Mandelbrot Set Suppose we have a complex polynomial f defined by a formula $f(z) = z^{2} + C$ for some complex number C. Then for any choice of complex number $z^{0}$ we can form a sequence $z^{0}$ , $z^{1}$ , $z^{2}$ , . . .
by iterating, that is, repeatedly applying, the function f . So we let $z^{1} = f(z^{0})$ , $z^{2} = f(z^{1})$, and so on. Some times the resulting sequence will tend to infinity, but some times it remains bounded-- that is, it stays within a fixed distance from $0$ . For example, if we take $C = 2$ and start with $z^{0} = 1$ , then the sequence goes $1$ , $3$ , $11$ , $123$ , 15131 , . . .
and clearly tends to infinity, where as if we start with $z^{0}$ equal to √ $12{}^{2}(1 - i 7)$ , then we find that $z^{1} = z^{0} + 2 = z^{0}$ so the sequence is bounded since all its terms are equal to $z^{0}$ . The Julia set associated with the constant C is the set of all $z^{0}$ for which the sequence remains bounded. Julia sets often have a fractal shape (see [IV.14](/part-04/dynamics) ). To define a Julia set, one fixes C and considers different possibilities for $z^{0}$ . What happens if one fixes $z^{0}$ and considers different possibilities for C? The result is the Mandelbrot set.
The precise definition is that it is the set of all C such that the sequence is bounded if you take $z^{0} = 0$ . (One could consider other values of $z^{0}$ , but the resulting sets are not interestingly different because they are related to each other by a simple change of variables .) The Mandelbrot set also has an intricate fractal shape--one that has captured the popular imagination. The detailed geometry of the Mandelbrot set is not yet fully understood; some of the resulting open problems are of major importance because they encode very general information about dynamical systems.
See dynamics [IV.14](/part-04/dynamics) for more details. III . $53$ Manifolds The surface of a sphere has the property that if you look at a very small portion of it then that portion will look like part of a plane. More generally, a d-dimensional III. Mathematical Concepts manifold, or d-manifold, is a geometrical object that looks “locally” like d-dimensional euclidean space [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions). Thus, $2$ - manifolds are smooth surfaces such as those of a sphere or a torus. Higher-dimensional manifolds are harder to visualize, but are a major topic of research.
The basics of manifolds are set out in some fundamental mathematical definitions [I . 3 § § 6 . 9 , 6 . 10 ] . More advanced ideas are discussed in differential topology [IV.7](/part-04/dierential-topology) and algebraic topology [IV.6](/part-04/algebraic-topology). See also algebraic geometry [IV.4](/part-04/algebra), moduli spaces [IV.8](/part-04/moduli-spaces), and ricci flow [III.78](/part-03/ricci-flow). (Even this is far from a complete list of articles in which manifolds feature .) III .
$54$ Matroids Dominic Welsh The original aim of Hassler Whitney when he introduced the concept of a matroid in 1935 was to produce an abstract notion that would capture the main ingredients of the structure of a set of vectors in a vector space [I.3](/part-01/fundamental-definitions), while avoiding any explicit mention of linear independence. To do this he singled out two fundamental properties and postulated that any family of subsets that possessed these properties was the collection of “independent sets” of a “matroid.” The first of these properties was an obvious one:
any subset of a linearly independent set is also linearly independent. The second property was more subtle: if A and B are two linearly independent sets and B contains more elements than A, then there exists some element of B that is not in A but which, when added to A, gives a set that is still linearly independent. Finally, in order to avoid trivialities he insisted that in every matroid the empty set must be independent.
Thus, formally, a matroid is defined to be a finite set E together with a family of subsets of E which are called the independent sets and which satisfy the following axioms. (i) The empty set is independent. (ii) Every subset of an independent set is independent. (iii) If A and B are independent sets, with the number of elements of A being one less than the number of elements of B, then there is some x in B that is not in A such that A ∪ {x} is also independent. Property (iii) is called the exchange axiom. The most fundamental example of a matroid is a set of vectors