# The Development of Rigor in                           III.34   Graphs

III.35. Hamiltonians

with out reference to the individual numbers example, one important generating function has the$a^{n}$. For formul af (x) = (1 - . qrt{1} - 4 x)/2 x. In such cases, one can deduce properties of the sequence from properties off , rather than the other way round.a0, a1, a2, . . . and algebraic combinatorics forms For more on generating functions, see[III.91](/part-03/transforms). [IV.18](/part - 04/enumerative - and - algebraic - combinatorics) and enumerative trans III.33 Genus The genus is a topological invariant of surfaces:
that is, a quantity associated with a surface that does not change when the surface is continuously deformed. Roughly speaking, it corresponds to the number of holes of that surface, so a sphere has genus 0, a torus has genus 1, a pretzel shape (that is, the surface of a blown-up figure eight) has genus 2, and so on. If one triangulates an orientable surface and counts the vertices, edges, and faces in the triangulation, denoting their numbers by V , E, and F, respectively, then the Euler characteristic is defined to be$V - E + F$.
It can be shown that i fact er i st ic, thengχis the genus and = 2 - 2 g. See [I.4 §2.2](/part - 01/general - goals) for a fullerχ is the Euler char - discussion. A famous result of poincaré [VI.61](/part - 06/jules - henri - poincar - 18541912) states that for every nonnegative integerg there is precisely one ori- en table surface of genus be defined for nonorientable surfaces, where a similarg.
(More over, genus can also result holds.) Seefor more about this theorem.differential topology [IV.7 §2.3](/part - 04/dierential - topology) One can associate an orientable surface, and therefore a genus, with a smooth algebraic curve. Antic curve [III.21](/part - 03/elliptic - curves) can be defined as a smooth curve of el lip genus 1. See details. algebraic geometry [IV.4 §10](/part - 04/algebra) for more III.34 Graphs A graph is one of the simplest of all mathematical struc - tures:
it consists of some elements called vertices (of which there are usually just finitely many), some pairs of which are deemed to be “joined” or “adjacent.” It is customary to represent the vertices by points in a plane and to join adjacent points by a line. The line is referred to as anized is irrelevant: all that is important is whether or not edge (though how the line is drawn or visual two points are joined). resented by a graph:
we can use vertices to represent For example, the rail network of a country can be rep - 215 the stations, and we can join two vertices if they repre-sent consecutive stations along some railroad. Another example is provided by the Internet: the vertices are allthe world’s computers, and two are adjacent if there is a direct link between them. Many questions in graph theory take the form of asking what some structural property of a graph can tell you about its other properties.
For example, suppose that we are trying to find a graph with does not contain a triangle (defined to be a set of threen vertices that vertices that are mutually joined). How many edges canthe graph have? Clearly 1 n2 is possible, at least if n is even, since one can then divide up thetwo equal classes and join all vertices in one class to4 n vertices into all vertices in the other. But can there be more edges than that? graphs. Letn such that every graph with Here is another example of a typical question aboutk be a positive integer.
Must there exist ann vertices always contains either vertices no two of which are joined to each other? Thisk vertices that are all joined to each other or k question is quite easy forbut already fork = 4 it is not obvious that such ank = 3 (where n =$6 suffices)$, n exists. For more on these problems (the first is the founding problem of “extremal graph theory,” while the sec-ond is the founding problem of “Ramsey theory”) and on the study of graphs in general, see probabilistic combinatorics [IV.19](/part-04/extremal-and-probabilistic-combinatorics).extremal and III.35 Hamiltonians

Terence Tao

At first glance, the many theories and equations of modern physics exhibit a bewildering diversity: for instance, compare classical mechanics with quantum mechanics, or nonrelativistic physics with relativistic physics, or particle physics with statistical mechanics. However, there are strong unifying themes connecting all of these theories.
One of these is the remarkable fact that in all of them the evolution of a physical system over time (as well as the steady states of that sys-tem) is largely controlled by a single object, the hamiltonian as describing the total energy of any given state in thatof that system, which can often be interpreted system. Roughly speaking, each physical phenomenon(e.g., ele ct ro magnetism, atomic bonding, particles in a potential well, etc.) may correspond to a single hamiltonian tum, statistical, etc.) corresponds to a different way H, while each type of mechanics (classical, quan-